
1. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2011 Jun;469(6):1677-82. Epub 2010 Sep 29.

Preoperative Radiographic Assessment of Limb-length Discrepancy in Total Hip
Arthroplasty.

Meermans G, Malik A, Witt J, Haddad F.

Department of Orthopaedics, University College London Hospital, London, UK,
geertmeermans@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Pelvic radiographs are helpful in assessing limb-length discrepancy
(LLD) before and after THA but are subject to variation. Different methods are
used to determine LLDs. As a pelvic reference, both ischial tuberosities and the 
teardrops are used, and as a femoral reference, the lesser trochanter and center 
of the femoral head are used.
QUESTIONS/PURPOSES: We validated the different methods for preoperative
radiographic measurement of LLDs and evaluated their reliability.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: LLDs were measured on full-leg radiographs for 52 patients 
(29 men, 23 women) with osteoarthritis (OA) of the hip and compared with
different methods for measuring LLDs on AP radiographs of the pelvis.
RESULTS: The true LLD varied from -8.0 to 9.1 mm. When the biischial line was
used as a pelvic reference, the LLD measured on AP pelvis radiographs was
different from the true LLD. No difference was found when the interteardrop line 
was used as a pelvic reference. There was substantial interobserver agreement
when the lesser trochanter was used as a femoral reference (kappa = 0.66-0.70)
and excellent interobserver and intraobserver agreement for all other
measurements (kappa = 0.84-0.93).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show use of the biischial line as a pelvic reference should
be discouraged and the interteardrop line is a better alternative. The center of 
the femoral head is a more reliable femoral landmark compared with the lesser
trochanter.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level I, diagnostic study. See Guidelines for Authors for a
complete description of levels of evidence.


PMID: 20878559  [PubMed - in process]


2. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2011 May;93 Suppl 2:52-6.

Hip arthroscopy: analysis of a single surgeon's learning experience.

Konan S, Rhee SJ, Haddad FS.

Department of Trauma and Orthopaedics, University College London Hospital, 235
Euston Road, London NW1 2BU, England. docsujith@yahoo.co.uk

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to objectively quantify a surgeon's
learning experience for hip arthroscopy.
METHODS: We prospectively reviewed the first 100 hip arthroscopic procedures
performed between 1999 and 2004 by a single experienced consultant orthopaedic
surgeon. In the second part of the study, three groups of patients were
sequentially analyzed: Group 1 included the first thirty patients treated by the 
surgeon; group 2, the sixty-first through ninetieth patients; and group 3, the
121st through 150th patients. The groups were compared with regard to the
diagnosis, the duration of the central and peripheral compartment procedure,
patient satisfaction, conversion to arthroplasty, and the nonarthritic hip score.
RESULTS: There was a decrease in complications from the first thirty cases to the
remaining seventy operations. There was an overall decrease in operative time
over the 100 cases, representing a gradual learning process. A marked decrease in
the operative time for central compartment arthroscopy was noted when we compared
group 1 (mean, seventy minutes; range, forty-five to ninety-eight minutes), group
2 (mean, forty-eight minutes; range, twenty-six to fifty-nine minutes), and group
3 (mean, thirty-seven minutes; range, eighteen to sixty-one minutes). The
operative time for peripheral compartment arthroscopy also decreased from group 2
(mean, ninety-one minutes; range, sixty to 126 minutes) to group 3 (mean,
forty-five minutes; range, thirty-six to sixty-two minutes). There was an overall
decrease in operative time over the first 100 cases. No difference among groups
was noted in the number of cases requiring a reoperation or conversion to
arthroplasty. There was a higher complication rate in the first thirty cases. An 
increase in the nonarthritic hip scores was noted postoperatively in the two
groups in which the preoperative score had been measured. The postoperative score
improved from group 1 (mean, 69; range, 39 to 84) to group 2 (mean, 79; range, 58
to 92) to group 3 (mean, 86; range, 51 to 98). Patient satisfaction was highest
in group 3.
CONCLUSIONS: Hip arthroscopy is associated with high patient satisfaction and
good short-term outcomes, but there is a learning curve that we estimate to be
approximately thirty cases.


PMID: 21543689  [PubMed - in process]


3. Obes Rev. 2011 Apr 27. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-789X.2011.00879.x. [Epub ahead of
print]

Body mass index, waist circumference and waist-hip ratio: which is the better
discriminator of cardiovascular disease mortality risk? Evidence from an
individual-participant meta-analysis of 82 864 participants from nine cohort
studies.

Czernichow S, Kengne AP, Stamatakis E, Hamer M, Batty GD.

INSERM U1018, Centre for Research in Epidemiology and Population Health, Hôpital 
Paul Brousse, Villejuif, France Département de Santé Publique, Hôpital Avicenne, 
Université Paris 13, Bobigny, France The George Institute for International
Health, Sydney, Australia Department of Epidemiology and Public Health,
University College London, London, UK Medical Research Council Social & Public
Health Sciences Unit, Glasgow, UK.

Few studies have examined both the relative magnitude of association and the
discriminative capability of multiple indicators of obesity with cardiovascular
disease (CVD) mortality risk. We conducted an individual-participant
meta-analysis of nine cohort studies of men and women drawn from the British
general population resulting in sample of 82 864 individuals. Body mass index
(BMI), waist circumference (WC) and waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) were measured
directly. There were 6641 deaths (1998 CVD) during a mean of 8.1 years of
follow-up. After adjustment, a one SD higher in WHR and WC was related to a
higher risk of CVD mortality (hazard ratio [95% CI]): 1.15 (1.05-1.25) and 1.15
(1.04-1.27), respectively. The risk of CVD mortality also increased linearly
across quintiles of both these abdominal obesity markers with a 66% increased
risk in the highest quintile of WHR. In age- and sex-adjusted models only, BMI
was related to CVD mortality but not in any other analyses. No major differences 
were revealed in the discrimination capabilities of models with BMI, WC or WHR
for cardiovascular or total mortality outcomes. In conclusion, measures of
abdominal adiposity, but not BMI, were related to an increased risk of CVD
mortality. No difference was observed in discrimination capacities between
adiposity markers.


PMID: 21521449  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2011 Apr;19(4):771-8. Epub 2010 Oct 14.

Stress and adiposity: a meta-analysis of longitudinal studies.

Wardle J, Chida Y, Gibson EL, Whitaker KL, Steptoe A.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, London, 
UK. j.wardle@ucl.ac.uk

Psychosocial stress has been strongly implicated in the biology of adiposity but 
epidemiological studies have produced inconsistent results. The aim of this
analysis was to bring together results from published, longitudinal, prospective 
studies examining associations between psychosocial stress and objectively
measured adiposity in a meta-analysis. Searches were conducted on Medline,
PsycINFO, Web of Science, and PubMed (to January 2009) and reference lists from
relevant articles were examined. Prospective studies relating psychosocial stress
(general life stress (including caregiver stress), work stress) to BMI, body fat,
body weight, waist circumference, or waist-to-hip ratio were included. Analyses
from 14 cohorts were collated and evaluated. There was no significant
heterogeneity, no evidence of publication bias, and no association between study 
quality and outcomes. The majority of analyses found no significant relationship 
between stress and adiposity (69%), but among those with significant effects,
more found positive than negative associations (25 vs. 6%). Combining results in 
a meta-analysis showed that stress was associated with increasing adiposity (r = 
0.014; confidence interval (CI) = 0.002-0.025, P < 0.05). Effects were stronger
for men than women, in analyses with longer rather than shorter follow-ups, and
in better quality studies. We conclude that psychosocial stress is a risk factor 
for weight gain but effects are very small. Variability across studies indicates 
there are moderating variables to be elucidated.


PMID: 20948519  [PubMed - in process]


5. Hip Int. 2011 Mar 31;21(2):129-135. doi: 10.5301/HIP.2011.6504. [Epub ahead of
print]

Revision hip arthroplasty using an extensively porous coated stem: medium term
results.

Jayakumar P, Malik AK, Islam SU, Haddad FS.

University College London Hospital, London - UK.

Abstract. This is a medium-term, prospective assessment of 56 revision total hip 
replacements using a.cementless, extensively porous-coated femoral stem.with a
mean follow-up of 6 years. All implants demonstrated evidence of bony ingrowth
and stable fixation with no cases of loosening, instability, deep infection,
stress shielding, subsidence or osteolysis at last follow-up. Complications
included two intra-operative fractures, three dislocations, one superficial
infection, and one patient with thigh pain. No femoral stems were revised. Good
to excellent clinical outcomes were achieved on Harris Hip Score (90% (n =
47/52), Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Index (92% (n = 48/52), and
University of California Los Angeles activity score (96% (n=50/52). This supports
the use of this system in the revision hip surgery armamentarium.


PMID: 21462150  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Br J Hosp Med (Lond). 2011 Jan;72(1):12-6.

Gluteus medius tears: an under-diagnosed pathology.

El-Husseiny M, Patel S, Rayan F, Haddad F.

Department of Trauma and Orthopaedics, University College London Hospitals,
London.

Tears of the gluteus medius tendon contribute to greater trochanteric pain
syndrome, but they are often overlooked as a cause of lateral hip pain and
tenderness. This review presents the relevant anatomy, pathophysiology,
diagnostic workup, differential diagnosis and management of these tears.


PMID: 21240111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2011 Jan;93(1):39-46.

Systematic review and meta-analysis of the use of tranexamic acid in total hip
replacement.

Sukeik M, Alshryda S, Haddad FS, Mason JM.

Department of Trauma and Orthopaedics, University College London Hospital, 235
Euston Road, London NW1 2BU, UK. msukeik@hotmail.com

We report a systematic review and meta-analysis of published randomised
controlled trials evaluating the efficacy of tranexamic acid (TXA) in reducing
blood loss and transfusion in total hip replacement (THR). The data were
evaluated using the generic evaluation tool designed by the Cochrane Bone, Joint 
and Muscle Trauma Group. We identified 11 clinical trials which were suitable for
detailed extraction of data. There were no trials that used TXA in revision THR. 
A total of seven studies (comprising 350 patients) were eligible for the blood
loss outcome data. The use of TXA reduced intra-operative blood loss by a mean of
104 ml (95% confidence interval (CI) -164 to -44, p = 0.0006, heterogeneity I(2) 
0%), postoperative blood loss by a mean of 172 ml (95% CI -263 to -81, p =
0.0002, heterogeneity I(2) 63%) and total blood loss by a mean of 289 ml (95% CI 
-440 to -138, p < 0.0002, heterogeneity I(2) 54%). TXA led to a significant
reduction in the proportion of patients requiring allogeneic blood transfusion
(risk difference -0.20, 95% CI -0.29 to -0.11, p < 0.00001, I(2) 15%). There were
no significant differences in deep-vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, infection
rates or other complications among the study groups.


PMID: 21196541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Psychosom Med. 2011 Jan;73(1):53-8. Epub 2010 Oct 14.

Ethnic and gender differences in the relationship between hostility and metabolic
and autonomic risk factors for coronary heart disease.

Williams ED, Steptoe A, Chambers JC, Kooner JS.

Psychobiology Group, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University
College London, 1-19 Torrington Place, London, United Kingdom.
emily.williams@ucl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: To examine the relationship between hostility and biological risk
factors for coronary heart disease (CHD) in a population of white European and
South Asian men and women living in the United Kingdom.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study involved a community-based sample of 1,757
healthy white and South Asian men and women aged between 35 years and 75 years
from West London. Participants completed the Cook-Medley Hostility Scale,
together with measures of standard biological risk factors and heart rate
variability. Associations between hostility and CHD risk factors were evaluated, 
controlling for age, education, smoking, physical activity, body mass index, and 
waist/hip ratio, using regression models.
RESULTS: In white men, hostility was associated positively with fasting glucose, 
glycosylated hemoglobin, and negatively with high-density lipoprotein
cholesterol. High levels of hostility were also related to increased prevalence
of diabetes and the metabolic syndrome in white men. Hostility in South Asian men
was associated with impaired autonomic function. Hostility was not related to any
biological CHD risk factors in South Asian or white women.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed that hostility was independently associated with 
glucose metabolism and dyslipidemia in white men, and with autonomic dysfunction 
in South Asian men. Hostility was found not to be relevant for measured CHD risk 
factors in females. Longitudinal data are required to establish whether the
impact of hostility on CHD risk in men is mediated through metabolic and
autonomic processes.


PMID: 20947780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Br J Haematol. 2010 Dec;151(5):469-76. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08433.x.
Epub 2010 Oct 18.

The impact of elective knee/hip replacement surgery and thromboprophylaxis with
rivaroxaban or dalteparin on thrombin generation.

Green L, Lawrie AS, Patel S, Hossain F, Chitolie A, Mackie IJ, Haddad FS, Machin 
SJ.

Department of Haematology, Haemostasis Research Unit, University College London
Department of Orthopaedics, University College London Hospitals, London, UK.
l.green@ucl.ac.uk

Total hip/knee replacement surgeries are associated with an increased risk of
venous thromboembolism and post-operative thromboprophylaxis has become standard 
treatment. This study aimed to: (i) assess the impact of hip/knee replacement
surgery on ex vivo thrombin generation (TG), prothrombin fragments 1 + 2 (F1 +
2), thrombin-antithrombin complexes (TAT) and D-dimer; (ii) compare the
anticoagulant effects of dalteparin and rivaroxaban on TG 24 h after surgery.
Haemostatic variables were assessed in plasma samples of 51 patients taken
pre-operatively, peri-operatively, and 24 h post-operatively. Prophylaxis, once a
day, with dalteparin or rivaroxaban, starting 6–8 h post-operatively, was
administered in 25 (14 knee/11 hip) and 26 patients (13 knee/13 hip)
respectively. TG, F1 + 2, TAT and D-dimer increased during surgery. Dalteparin
patients showed a variable TG response 24 h after surgery: conversely, the effect
of rivaroxaban on TG was consistent across individuals. Good correlation was seen
between rivaroxaban levels and TG-lag-time (rs = 0·46, P = 0·01); TG-time-to-Peak
(rs = 0·53, P = 0·005); TG-peak-thrombin (rs = −0·59, P = 0·001); and
TG-velocity-index-rate (rs = −0·61, P = 0·0009). Patients who received
rivaroxaban showed a greater decrease of TG, F1 + 2 and TAT (but not D-dimer)
than those on dalteparin. TG increases during hip/knee replacement surgery.
Rivaroxaban inhibits TG more than dalteparin at 24 h after surgery.


PMID: 20950405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Ethn Health. 2010 Dec;15(6):549-68.

Religious and ethnic differences in health: evidence from the Health Surveys for 
England 1999 and 2004.

Karlsen S, Nazroo JY.

Department of Epidemiology & Public Health, University College London, 1-19
Torrington Place, London, UK. s.karlsen@ucl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVES: To examine the role of religion in the patterning of health
inequities, and how this is related to ethnicity and socioeconomic status.
DESIGN: Multivariate analyses using nationally representative data on
self-assessed fair or poor health, longstanding limiting illness, diagnosed
diabetes, diagnosed hypertension, waist-hip ratio, body mass index, current
tobacco use and participating in no regular physical activity from 14,924
Christians, 4337 Muslims, 656 Sikhs, 1197 Hindus and 2682 people reporting not
identifying with any religion with different ethnic backgrounds, who were
interviewed as part of the Health Survey for England in either 1999 or 2004,
adjusted for age, gender and socioeconomic status and periodicity.
RESULTS: Odds ratios for general health, hypertension, diabetes, waist-hip ratio,
tobacco use and physical activity speak to the importance of ethnicity in the
patterning of health inequalities. But there is also evidence of an important,
independent role for religion, with risks for the different health indicators
varying between people with the same ethnic, but different religious,
identifications. Adjusting for socioeconomic status attenuated the
ethnic/religious patterning of, particularly, self-assessed health, longstanding 
activity-limiting illness, waist-hip ratio, body mass index and tobacco use.
CONCLUSIONS: This evidence enables greater understanding of the complexities of
the relationship between ethnicity, religion and health, recognising the need to 
understand the heterogeneity underlying both ethnic and religious group
membership and the processes producing the structural disadvantage facing certain
religious and ethnic groups in the mediation of the relationship between health
and ethnicity/religion.


PMID: 20672202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. BMJ. 2010 Nov 30;341:c6267. doi: 10.1136/bmj.c6267.

Explaining variation in referral from primary to secondary care: cohort study.

McBride D, Hardoon S, Walters K, Gilmour S, Raine R.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, London
WC1E 6BT, UK. dulciemcbride@googlemail.com

Comment in
    BMJ. 2010;341:c6175.
    BMJ. 2011;342:d129.
    BMJ. 2010;341:c7407.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the extent to which referral for defined symptoms from
primary care varies by age, sex, and social deprivation and whether any
sociodemographic variations in referral differ according to the presence of
national referral guidance and the potential of the symptoms to be life
threatening.
DESIGN: Cohort study using individual patient data from the health improvement
network database in primary care.
SETTING: United Kingdom.
PARTICIPANTS: 5492 patients with postmenopausal bleeding, 23 121 with hip pain,
and 101 212 with dyspepsia from 326 general practices, 2001-7.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Multivariable associations between odds of immediate
referral for postmenopausal bleeding and age and social deprivation; hazard rates
of referral for hip pain or dyspepsia and age, sex, and social deprivation.
Analyses for dyspepsia were stratified for people aged less than and more than 55
years because referral guidance differs by age.
RESULTS: 61.4% (3374/5492) of patients with postmenopausal bleeding, 17.4%
(4019/23 121) with hip pain, and 13.8% (13 944/101 212) with dyspepsia were
referred. The likelihood of referral for postmenopausal bleeding declined with
increasing age: the adjusted odds ratio for patients aged 85 or more compared
with those aged 55-64 was 0.39 (95% confidence interval 0.31 to 0.49). Patients
aged 85 or more with hip pain were also less likely to be referred than those
aged 55-64 (0.68, 0.57 to 0.81). Women were less likely than men to be referred
for hip pain (hazard ratio 0.90, 95% confidence interval 0.84 to 0.96). More
deprived patients with hip pain or dyspepsia (if aged <55) were less likely to be
referred. Adjusted hazard ratios for those in the most deprived Townsend fifth
compared with the least deprived were 0.72 (95% confidence interval 0.62 to 0.82)
and 0.76 (0.68 to 0.85), respectively. No socioeconomic gradient was evident in
referral for postmenopausal bleeding.
CONCLUSIONS: Inequalities in referral associated with socioeconomic circumstances
were more likely to occur in the absence of both explicit guidance and
potentially life threatening conditions, whereas inequalities with age were
evident for all conditions.


PMCID: PMC2995017
PMID: 21118873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Hip Int. 2010 Oct-Dec;20(4):482-8.

Anterior approaches to the hip for the treatment of femoro-acetabular
impingement: a cadaveric study.

Malik AK, Chou DT, Witt JD.

University College London Hospital NHS Trust, London, UK. akmalik100@hotmail.com

Femoroacetabular impingement (FAI) may be a cause of early osteoarthritis of the 
hip. The aim of surgical treatment is to improve the head-neck offset in the
presence of a cam lesion and to perform acetabular rim resection when pincer
impingement is evident, either by open surgery or arthroscopically. We
investigated two mini anterior approaches to the hip joint based on the Heuter
and direct anterior approach to assess their potential for treating FAI. The two 
approaches were employed in 20 hips in 10 human cadaveric specimens. The area of 
femoral head and the portion of the acetabular rim that could be exposed was
documented. We found that the two approaches were easy and reproducible. Both
allowed adequate exposure to the femoral head. The area of acetabular rim
accessible varied significantly according to the approach (p<0.05). We also found
that the position of the anterior inferior iliac spine in relation to the
acetabular rim also affected the area of acetabular rim exposed (p<0.05). In
summary, cam and pincer impingement of the hip can be treated by either the
direct anterior or by the Heuter approach. The choice of approach is dictated by 
the site of the acetabular pincer lesion identified on pre-operative imaging,
with a more medial exposure possible through the direct anterior approach and
more anterolateral exposure via the Heuter approach.


PMID: 21157753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Hip Int. 2010 Oct-Dec;20(4):418-26.

Periprosthetic femoral fractures in total hip arthroplasty - a review.

Rayan F, Haddad F.

Department of Orthopaedics, University College London Hospitals, London, UK.
rayanmarakkar@yahoo.co.uk

Periprosthetic femoral fractures (PFF) are among the more difficult and expensive
complications of total hip arthroplasty. A rise in the elderly population and
increase use of primary hip replacement has led to an escalating incidence. They 
can occur intra operatively and post operatively. The treatment algorithm defined
by the Vancouver classification has universal acceptance. The epidemiology,
etiology, classification and the management of periprosthetic femoral fractures
in total hip arthroplasty are reviewed.


PMID: 21157744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Arthroplasty. 2010 Oct;25(7):1170.e7-9. Epub 2010 Feb 19.

Modification of the explant system for the removal of well fixed hip resurfacing 
sockets.

Rawal JS, Soler JA, Rhee JS, Dobson MH, Konan S, Haddad FS.

Department of Trauma and Orthopedics, University College London Hospital, London,
United Kingdom.

A major concern during revision hip arthroplasty is acetabular bone loss during
the extraction of well-fixed acetabular components. Despite the good early
survivorship of resurfacing prostheses, revision surgery may be necessary. We
recommend the use of the Explant acetabular extraction system (Zimmer, Warsaw,
Ind) with a trial liner to preserve acetabular bone stock. We present 2 cases of 
revised resurfacings using this technique, demonstrating minimal interference to 
the remaining acetabular bone.


PMID: 20171047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2010 Sep 15;182(6):745-51. Epub 2010 Jun 10.

Survival in critical illness is associated with early activation of mitochondrial
biogenesis.

Carré JE, Orban JC, Re L, Felsmann K, Iffert W, Bauer M, Suliman HB, Piantadosi
CA, Mayhew TM, Breen P, Stotz M, Singer M.

Bloomsbury Institute for Intensive Care Medicine, Department of Medicine and
Wolfson Institute of Biomedical Research, University College London, London,
United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2010 Sep 15;182(6):726-8.

RATIONALE: We previously reported outcome-associated decreases in muscle
energetic status and mitochondrial dysfunction in septic patients with multiorgan
failure. We postulate that survivors have a greater ability to maintain or
recover normal mitochondrial functionality.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether mitochondrial biogenesis, the process promoting 
mitochondrial capacity, is affected in critically ill patients.
METHODS: Muscle biopsies were taken from 16 critically ill patients recently
admitted to intensive care (average 1-2 d) and from 10 healthy, age-matched
patients undergoing elective hip surgery.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Survival, mitochondrial morphology, mitochondrial 
protein content and enzyme activity, mitochondrial biogenesis factor mRNA,
microarray analysis, and phosphorylated (energy) metabolites were determined. Ten
of 16 critically ill patients survived intensive care. Mitochondrial size
increased with worsening outcome, suggestive of swelling. Respiratory protein
subunits and transcripts were depleted in critically ill patients and to a
greater extent in nonsurvivors. The mRNA content of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor γ coactivator 1-α (transcriptional coactivator of
mitochondrial biogenesis) was only elevated in survivors, as was the
mitochondrial oxidative stress protein manganese superoxide dismutase. Eventual
survivors demonstrated elevated muscle ATP and a decreased phosphocreatine/ATP
ratio.
CONCLUSIONS: Eventual survivors responded early to critical illness with
mitochondrial biogenesis and antioxidant defense responses. These responses may
partially counteract mitochondrial protein depletion, helping to maintain
functionality and energetic status. Impaired responses, as suggested in
nonsurvivors, could increase susceptibility to mitochondrial damage and cellular 
energetic failure or impede the ability to recover normal function. Clinical
trial registered with clinical trials.gov (NCT00187824).


PMCID: PMC2949402
PMID: 20538956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2010 Jun;468(6):1621-9. Epub 2009 Oct 17.

Cerebral microembolization during primary total hip arthroplasty and
neuropsychologic outcome: a pilot study.

Patel RV, Stygall J, Harrington J, Newman SP, Haddad FS.

Department of Trauma & Orthopaedics, University College London Hospitals Trust,
Flat 3, 39 Priory Terrace, NW6 4DG London, UK. rp@rahulpatel.net

BACKGROUND: Intraoperative cerebral microembolization occurs in a substantial
proportion of patients undergoing THA. Historically, postoperative cognitive
dysfunction has been attributed to different factors, including anesthesia, but
the influence of the surgery has not been thoroughly examined.
QUESTIONS/PURPOSES: We conducted a prospective, controlled clinical trial to
assess intraoperative cerebral microembolization during THA and neuropsychologic 
outcome.
METHODS: The presence of a patent foramen ovale (PFO) also was investigated,
using transcranial Doppler, to determine whether this affected cerebral
microembolic incidence and load and whether microemboli occurred as a result of
specific surgical activity. Forty-five patients were recruited who underwent THA 
and neuropsychologic assessment; a battery of tests was administered
preoperatively and at 6 weeks and 6 months postoperatively.
RESULTS: Overall, patients showed improvement in total neuropsychologic change
scores at both postoperative intervals. The incidence of cerebral
microembolization for THA was 23%. The prevalence of PFO was 37%. PFO did not
appear to influence microemboli load or incidence. More microemboli were seen
during femoral component insertion and impaction.
CONCLUSIONS: Intraoperative cerebral microembolization occurs in a substantial
proportion of patients during THA recorded by transcranial Doppler. The
microemboli load is low and is not influenced by the presence of PFO. Certain
surgical activities seem responsible for greater cerebral microemboli generation.
However, neuropsychologic outcome was not affected postoperatively by microemboli
or other operative or patient variables.


PMCID: PMC2865620
PMID: 19838644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Eval Clin Pract. 2010 Jun;16(3):529-38. Epub 2010 Feb 18.

Major elective joint replacement surgery: socioeconomic variations in surgical
risk, postoperative morbidity and length of stay.

Hollowell J, Grocott MP, Hardy R, Haddad FS, Mythen MG, Raine R.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, London, 
UK. jennifer.hollowell@npeu.ox.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Patient deprivation is associated with greater need for total hip and
knee replacement surgery (THR/TKR) and a higher prevalence of risk factors for
surgical complications. Our aim was to examine associations between deprivation
and aspects of the inpatient episode for patients undergoing these procedures.
METHODS: We analysed socioeconomic variations in preoperative surgical risk,
postoperative morbidity and length of stay for 655 patients undergoing elective
THR/TKR at a large metropolitan hospital. Surgical risk was assessed using the
orthopaedic version of the POSSUM scoring system, postoperative morbidity was
assessed using the postoperative morbidity survey, and socioeconomic status was
measured using the Index of Multiple Deprivation. We adjusted for age, sex,
surgical site and primary vs. revision surgery.
RESULTS: We found only a modest, clinically insignificant socioeconomic gradient 
in preoperative surgical risk and no socioeconomic gradient in postoperative
morbidity. There was a strong socioeconomic gradient in length of stay, but only 
for patients undergoing TKR. This was due to deprived patients being more likely 
to remain in hospital without morbidity following TKR.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest differential selection of healthier patients
for surgery. Hospitals serving deprived communities may have excess, unfunded
costs because of the increased length of stay of socioeconomically disadvantaged 
patients.


PMID: 20210822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Acta Orthop Belg. 2010 Apr;76(2):181-8.

Prevalence of acetabular cartilage lesions and labral tears in femoroacetabular
impingement.

Meermans G, Konan S, Haddad FS, Witt JD.

University College London Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
geertmeermans@hotmail.com

The goal of this study was to determine the prevalence of associated acetabular
cartilage lesions and labral tears in patients with cam-type femoro-acetabular
impingement (FAI). We evaluated acetabular cartilage lesions and labral tears
found during hip arthroscopy in 52 patients with radiological signs of cam-type
FAI. We found a high prevalence of associated lesions (86.5%) in patients with
cam-type FAI. They were graded according to the morphology, extent, and location 
of the lesion. Forty-one patients (78.8%) had an acetabular cartilage lesion.
Labral tears were found in 31 patients (59.6%). There was a high correlation
between age and the presence and extent of acetabular cartilage and labral
lesions (r = 0.70; p < 0.0001 and r = 0.45; p <0.001 respectively). There was
also a high correlation between the extent of the acetabular cartilage lesion and
the presence of labral lesions (r = 0.62; p < 0.0001). Despite the recognized
consequences of associated lesions on treatment and outcome, no classification
system includes this aspect of FAI. Based on our findings, we developed a system 
to grade acetabular cartilage lesions according to their morphology and extent.
This information can help to define the natural history of cam-type FAI, and to
determine appropriate treatment.


PMID: 20503943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Lupus. 2010 Apr;19(4):486-91.

Antithrombotic treatment failures in antiphospholipid syndrome: the new
anticoagulants?

Cohen H, Machin SJ.

Department of Haematology, University College London, London, UK.
hannah.cohen@uclh.nhs.uk

Anticoagulation with oral vitamin K antagonists (VKA) is the mainstay of the
treatment of venous and/or arterial thromboembolism in patients with
antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), although the optimal intensity of
anticoagulation remains controversial. The limitations of existing anticoagulants
have driven a search for novel agents. Dabigatran etexilate (Pradaxa), a direct
thrombin inhibitor (DTI), and rivaroxaban (Xarelto), the first in a new class of 
drugs, the oral direct factor Xa (FXa) inhibitors, are both fixed-dose orally
administered agents. They are now licensed in the UK and Europe for the
prevention of venous thromboembolism (VTE) in adult patients undergoing elective 
total hip replacement (THR) or total knee replacement (TKR). Prospective
randomized clinical trials suggest that these agents, and also apixaban, a
further oral direct anti-Xa inhibitor, may have potential in other areas
including the treatment of acute VTE, prevention of stroke or systemic embolism
in patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) and acute coronary syndromes. Here, we 
summarize current indications for these agents and address the potential for
their use in patients with thrombotic APS.


PMID: 20353992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Trials. 2010 Jan 18;11(1):6.

Multi-centre cluster randomised trial comparing a community group exercise
programme with home based exercise with usual care for people aged 65 and over in
primary care: protocol of the ProAct 65+ trial.

Iliffe S, Kendrick D, Morris R, Skelton D, Gage H, Dinan S, Stevens Z, Pearl M,
Masud T.

Department of Primary Care & Population Health, University College London,
Rowland Hill St, London NW3 2PF, UK. s.iliffe@pcps.ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Regular physical activity reduces the risk of mortality from all
causes, with a powerful beneficial effect on risk of falls and hip fractures.
However, physical activity levels are low in the older population and previous
studies have demonstrated only modest, short-term improvements in activity levels
with intervention.
DESIGN/METHODS: Pragmatic 3 arm parallel design cluster controlled trial of
class-based exercise (FAME), home-based exercise (OEP) and usual care amongst
older people (aged 65 years and over) in primary care. The primary outcome is the
achievement of recommended physical activity targets 12 months after cessation of
intervention. Secondary outcomes include functional assessments, predictors of
exercise adherence, the incidence of falls, fear of falling, quality of life and 
continuation of physical activity after intervention, over a two-year follow up. 
An economic evaluation including participant and NHS costs will be embedded in
the clinical trial.
DISCUSSION: The ProAct65 trial will explore and evaluate the potential for
increasing physical activity among older people recruited through general
practice. The trial will be conducted in a relatively unselected population, and 
will address problems of selective recruitment, potentially low retention rates, 
variable quality of interventions and falls risk.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Trial Registration: ISRCTN43453770.


PMCID: PMC2821309
PMID: 20082696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Hip Int. 2010 Jan-Mar;20(1):18-25.

Custom uncemented revision stems based on a femoral classification.

Hua J, Walker PS, Muirhead-Allwood SK, Engelhardt F, Bentley G.

Institute of Orthopaedics and Musculoskeletal Science, University College London,
London, UK. j.hua@ucl.ac.uk

From the outcome of 175 cases, a group of 4 types of custom-designed HA-coated
hip stems, based upon an incremental scale of bone condition, was demonstrated to
be sufficient for use with the variety of cavitary defects encountered in
revision hip surgery. Harris Hip Score evaluation showed a significant
improvement in hip pain and function. Radiographic measurements of axial
migration over a 4-year period were less than 2 mm. The migration data were
similar across the 4 types of revision stem. A follow-up using DEXA scans showed 
preservation of bone in all regions up to 4 years, which justifies the design
rationale for the close fit of the stems in the proximal region in achieving
initial stability and strain transfer.


PMID: 20235071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Hip Int. 2010 Jan-Mar;20(1):38-42.

Uncemented revision hip arthroplasty in B2 and B3 periprosthetic femoral
fractures - A prospective analysis.

Rayan F, Konan S, Haddad FS.

Department of Orthopaedics, University College London Hospitals, London, UK.
rayanmarakkar@yahoo.co.uk

Periprosthetic femoral fractures are an increasingly common complication of total
hip arthroplasty. If there is a fracture of the femur in the presence of an
unstable prosthesis (Vancouver type B2 and B3), revision of the stem is
imperative. We describe our experience of cementless femoral revision in
management of twenty-six patients who sustained periprosthetic fractures of the
Vancouver type B2 or B3, between February 1999 and March 2005. All patients were 
managed by revision arthroplasty, using cementless femoral stems. Cortical
struts, cable plating systems, bone allograft and demineralised bone matrix were 
used to aid the reconstruction where indicated. All the fractures had clinical
and radiological union. The outcome was graded, subjectively as satisfactory by
all patients and this is substantiated objectively, by a post operative mean
Harris hip score of 83.04. Uncemented revision appears to be an attractive option
for periprosthetic fractures with unstable femoral stems.


PMID: 20235063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nephron Clin Pract. 2010;114(1):c60-6. Epub 2009 Oct 9.

Does diabetes mellitus predispose to increased fluid overload in peritoneal
dialysis patients?

Davenport A, Willicombe MK.

University College London Center for Nephrology, Royal Free and University
College Medical School, London, UK. andrew.davenport@royalfree.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: Diabetic peritoneal dialysis patients have been reported to have
faster peritoneal solute transport and may be at risk of reduced ultrafiltration 
volumes, leading to fluid overload.
METHODS: We audited multi-frequency bioimpedance data from 198 consecutive
peritoneal dialysis patients (141 nondiabetics and 57 diabetics).
RESULTS: Diabetic patients had increased body mass index (males 27 +/- 4 vs. 26
+/- 4; females 28 +/- 5 vs. 25 +/- 4; p < 0.01 for both), waist to hip ratio
(males 0.94 +/- 0.07 vs. 0.94 +/- 0.04; females 0.99 +/- 0.9 vs. 0.94 +/- 0.09; p
< 0.01 for both) and body fat (males 31 +/- 8 vs. 26 +/- 11%, p < 0.05; females
40 +/- 8 vs. 33 +/- 10%, p < 0.01) compared to nondiabetic patients. D4/P
creatinine was greater for the female diabetic patients than the nondiabetic
patients (0.75 +/- 0.1 vs. 0.69 +/- 0.1; p = 0.044); otherwise, the peritoneal
equilibrium test (PET) results did not differ. Extracellular water (ECW) adjusted
for height was similar in diabetic and nondiabetic patients, but the ratio of ECW
to total body water (TBW) was greater for diabetics (males 0.40 +/- 0.01 vs. 0.39
+/- 0.01; females 0.39 +/- 0.01 vs. 0.38 +/- 0.01; p < 0.05 for both).
CONCLUSIONS: Diabetic and nondiabetic patients had similar PET results, 24-hour
net peritoneal ultrafiltration and blood pressure control. The ratio of ECW to
TBW was greater in diabetic patients, and although this could be due to a loss of
intracellular water, as albumin and C-reactive protein did not differ, it
suggests that diabetic peritoneal dialysis patients have an expanded
extracellular volume.


PMID: 19816044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Tissue Eng Part A. 2009 Dec;15(12):3689-96.

Augmentation of bone growth onto the acetabular cup surface using bone marrow
stromal cells in total hip replacement surgery.

Kalia P, Coathup MJ, Oussedik S, Konan S, Dodd M, Haddad FS, Blunn GW.

Division of Surgery and Interventional Science, Centre for Biomedical
Engineering, Institute of Orthopaedics and Musculoskeletal Science, Royal
National Orthopaedic Hospital, University College London, Middlesex, United
Kingdom.

Aseptic loosening of acetabular components in total hip arthroplasty is the major
cause of implant failure. Our hypothesis was that spraying autologous bone
marrow-derived stromal cells (BMSCs) in fibrin glue onto the surface of
hydroxyapatite-coated uncemented acetabular components would increase bone
formation and contact in a caprine model. Ten million BMSCs were sprayed onto the
acetabular cup at the time of surgery. Animals in the control group received
fibrin glue only. Ground reaction force measurements were taken preoperatively
and at 6 and 12 weeks postsurgery. After retrieval at 12 weeks new bone
formation, bone-implant contact and fibrous tissue thickness adjacent to the cup 
were quantified. Viability and proliferation assays showed that the majority of
the BMSCs survived spraying in fibrin glue at pressures of up to 1.5 atm. New
bone growth adjacent to the bone implant interface in the BMSC-treated group
(71.42 +/- 8.97%) was 30% greater than in control (54.22 +/- 16.56%) although
this difference was not statistically significant. However, significantly
increased new bone formation was measured at the periphery of the cup (zone 5) in
the BMSC-treated group (71.97 +/- 10.91%) when compared with control (23.85 +/-
15.13%, p = 0.028). Bone-implant contact was significantly greater in the
BMSC-treated group (20.03 +/- 4.64%) (control: 13.71 +/- 8.32%, p = 0.027);
correspondingly, the average thickness of the fibrous tissue membrane where
present was significantly reduced at the periphery of the cups in the
BMSC-treated group (327.49 +/- 20.38 mum) when compared with control (887.21 +/- 
158.89 mum) (p = 0.02). This study has clinical applications as greater bone
contact at the cup surface will improve fixation and may decrease longer-term
aseptic loosening by preventing wear debris-induced bone loss at the implant
interface.


PMID: 19505197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Pediatrics. 2009 Nov;124(5):1372-9. Epub 2009 Oct 26.

Aluminum exposure from parenteral nutrition in preterm infants: bone health at
15-year follow-up.

Fewtrell MS, Bishop NJ, Edmonds CJ, Isaacs EB, Lucas A.

Medical Research Council Childhood Nutrition Research Centre, University College 
London Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom.
m.fewtrell@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Pediatrics. 2009 Dec;124(6):1709.

OBJECTIVE: Aluminum has known neurotoxicity and may impair short-term bone
health. In a randomized trial, we showed reduced neurodevelopmental scores in
preterm infants who were previously exposed to aluminum from parenteral nutrition
solutions. Here, in the same cohort, we test the hypothesis that neonatal
aluminum exposure also adversely affects long-term bone health, as indicated by
reduced bone mass.
METHODS: Bone area (BA) and bone mineral content (BMC) of lumbar spine, hip, and 
whole body were measured with dual radiograph absorptiometry in 13- to
15-year-olds who were born preterm and randomly assigned standard or
aluminum-depleted parenteral nutrition solutions during the neonatal period.
RESULTS: Fifty-nine children (32% of survivors) were followed. Those who were
randomly assigned to standard parenteral nutrition solution had lower lumbar
spine BMC, apparently explained by a concomitant decrease in bone size. In
nonrandomized analyses, children who were exposed to neonatal aluminum intakes
above the median (55 microg/kg) had lower hip BMC (by 7.6% [95% confidence
interval: 0.12-13.8]; P = 0.02), [corrected] independent of bone (or body) size.
CONCLUSIONS: Neonates who are exposed to parenteral aluminum may have reduced
lumbar spine and hip bone mass during adolescence, potential risk factors for
later osteoporosis and hip fracture. These findings need confirmation in larger, 
more detailed studies. Nevertheless, given our previous finding of adverse
developmental outcome in these individuals and the sizeable number of
contemporary infants who undergo intensive neonatal care and are still exposed to
aluminum via parenteral feeding solutions, the potential adverse long-term
consequences of early aluminum exposure now deserve renewed attention.


PMID: 19858156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Acta Orthop Belg. 2009 Oct;75(5):671-7.

Intra-operative cerebral microembolisation during primary hybrid total hip
arthroplasty compared with primary hip resurfacing.

Patel R, Stygall J, Harrington J, Newman S, Haddad F.

University College London, United Kingdom. rp@rahulpatel.net

Fat embolism during total joint arthroplasty or intramedullary procedures is well
documented and is infrequently fatal. Considerable morbidity is associated with
fat embolism syndrome, and post operative cognitive dysfunction is frequently
seen, yet the exact pathophysiology remains unclear. Intraoperative cerebral
microemboli can be detected using transcranial Doppler ultrasound and moreover
the presence of a patent foramen ovale (PFO) may be examined for using a
validated technique employing this modality. Persistent patent foramen ovale may 
act as a conduit for embolic material to traverse from the venous to the systemic
circulation and consequently affect cerebral function. We wished to 1)
investigate the incidence of cerebral microembolisation during primary hybrid
total hip arthroplasty and compare this with hip resurfacing, 2) examine the
influence of patent foramen ovale on cerebral microembolisation and 3)assess the 
influence of cerebral microemboli on the outcome of patients undergoing these
procedures. We prospectively compared 12 patients undergoing hip resurfacing with
12 patients undergoing hybrid total hip replacement (THR) for the incidence and
load of intraoperative cerebral microemboli, using transcranial Doppler. All
patients were tested for the presence of a patent foramen ovale using a validated
technique. Outcome was assessed using the WOMAC, Harris Hip Score, Oxford Hip
Score and EuroQoL quality of life measure. No patient in the hip resurfacing
group demonstrated intra-operative cerebral microembolisation. Five patients in
the THR group showed transcranial Doppler evidence of microemobli during the
procedure. With the small numbers of patients available, there was not a
significant difference in microemboli load between the groups (p = 0.09). There
was no significant difference between the groups regarding the incidence of PFO
(p = 0.78). There was no significant relationship between the incidence and total
microemboli load and the incidence of PFO (p = 0.56). There was no significant
difference in outcome at six months between patients who demonstrated microemboli
and those who did not. The incidence of cerebral microembolisation during hip
resurfacing appears to be very low. Although our study demonstrated cerebral
microemboli in a significant proportion of patients undergoing primary hybrid
THR, the numbers of microemboli were low and the presence of a patent foramen
ovale did not influence microemboli incidence or load. Finally, patients who
demonstrated cerebral microemboli did not have a worse outcome than patients who 
did not.


PMID: 19999881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Int J Med Sci. 2009 Sep 2;6(5):253-7.

Two-stage procedure in the treatment of late chronic hip infections--spacer
implantation.

Sukeik M, Haddad FS.

Department of Orthopaedics, University College London Hospital, 235 Euston Road, 
London, NW1 2BU, United Kingdom. msukeik@hotmail.com

Infection after total hip arthroplasties (THA) is a devastating complication with
significant consequences for both the patients and the healthcare systems. In
recent times, a two stage procedure using antibiotic-impregnated interim spacers 
has become the most popular treatment for late chronic hip joint infections after
THA with success rates over 90%. In this review, we discuss the different types
of spacers used in the treatment of chronically infected THA and conclude that
hip spacers are effective in the treatment of hip joint infections.


PMCID: PMC2755121
PMID: 19834591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Orthopedics. 2009 Sep;32(9). pii: orthosupersite.com/view.asp?rID=42842. doi:
10.3928/01477447-20090728-19.

The role of impaction grafting: the when and how.

Haddad FS, Rayan F.

University College London, Princess Grace Hospital, 42 Nottingham Place, London, 
United Kingdom.

The challenges of acetabular revision include bone loss and poor bone biology.
Favorable 10-year reports exist of uncemented acetabular revision using
hemispherical uncemented sockets. In the presence of bone stock deficiency,
adjunctive morsellized impaction bone grafting is a recognized means of restoring
bone stock. We attempt to restore bone stock with impaction grafting beneath a
cementless cup for contained defects, defects that can be rendered contained, and
whenever there is capacity for rim fixation. The technique of bone graft
preparation is important. We use a mixture of bone milling and bone chips of
various sizes. Morsellized allograft is inserted, packed, and/or reverse reamed
into any defects. The reconstruction relies on the ability to gain biological
fixation of the component to the underlying host bone. This requires intimate
host bone contact and rigid implant stability. The fixation is therefore
augmented with screws in all cases. It is important to achieve host bone contact 
in a least part of the dome and posterior column. When this is possible, and
particularly when there is a good rim fit, we have not found it absolutely
necessary to have contact with host bone over >50% of the surface. Stability of
primary fixation is a better predictor of outcome than volume of graft or
percentage of host bone contact. The advantages of bone grafting in acetabular
reconstruction include the ability to restore bone stock, rebuild a normal hip
center and hip biomechanics, and increase bone stock for future revisions.


PMID: 19751009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Eur J Endocrinol. 2009 Jun;160(6):899-907. Epub 2009 Mar 26.

Treatment for 24 months with recombinant human GH has a beneficial effect on bone
mineral density in young adults with childhood-onset GH deficiency.

Conway GS, Szarras-Czapnik M, Racz K, Keller A, Chanson P, Tauber M, Zacharin M; 
1369 GHD to GHDA Transition Study Group.

Collaborators: Jones T, Johnston R, Price G, Epstein M, Zacharin M, Cameron F,
Holdaway I, Grey A, Maiter D, Gaillard RC, De Luca AM, Mullis P, Meinhart U,
Bachmann S, Tschaeppeler H, Lippuner K, Wolf R, Giger A, Rohrbach M, Vuissoz JM, 
Keller E, Keller A, Carrascosa A, Yeste D, Chanson P, Brue T, Tauber M, Conway G,
Sturrock A, Connell J, Ahmed F, Rácz K, Szucs N, Gabriella G, Horváth C, Mondok
A, Góth M, Kovács L, Hubina E, Johansson G, Svensson J, Romer T, Szarras-Czapnik 
M, Oczkowska U, Starzyk J, Górska A, Januś D, Kalicka-Kasperczyk A,
Kumorowicz-Kopiec M, Górska A, Dolezal-Oltarzewska K, Roztoczańska D, Wojtyś J,
Pietkowska E, Krzyzanowska-Siniarska B, Ogonoswki J, Miazgowski T,
Korpal-Szczyrska M, Dorant B, Kamińska H, Birkholtz D, Wejs LR, Turek K, Barg E, 
Wikiera B, Jedrzejczuk D, Bollerslev J.

Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, University College London Hospitals,
250 Euston Road, London NW1 2PQ, UK. g.conway@ucl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: Discontinuation of growth hormone (GH) therapy on completion of linear
growth may adversely affect bone mineral density (BMD) in young adults with
childhood-onset GH-deficiency (GHD). In the present study, we analyzed the impact
of GH treatment on bone in young adults with GHD.
METHODS: BMD at the lumbar spine (L2-L4), total hip, and total body was measured 
at baseline and after 24 months in a cohort of young adults (18-25 years; n=160) 
with severe GHD treated with GH during childhood who were randomized to GH
(n=109) or no treatment (n=51) in a multicenter, multinational, open-label study.
GH starting doses (0.2 mg/day (males), 0.4 mg/day (females)) were increased after
1 month to 0.6 mg/day (males) and 0.9 mg/day (females) and then to 1.0 mg/day
(males) and 1.4 mg/day (females) at 3 months for the remainder of the study.
RESULTS: After 24 months, lumbar spine BMD had increased significantly more in
GH-treated patients than in controls (6 vs 2%; estimated treatment difference;
3.5% (95% confidence interval, 1.52-5.51) P<0.001). GH also had a significant
positive effect on total hip BMD (P=0.015). Total body BMD was unchanged from
baseline (P=0.315).
CONCLUSIONS: In young adults treated for childhood-onset GHD, there is a
beneficial effect of continued GH treatment on BMD in adult life. Twenty-four
months of GH treatment in these young adults was associated with an estimated
3.5% greater increase in BMD of the lumbar spine compared with controls.


PMID: 19324976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009 Apr;91(4):911-8.

The effect of the femoral head ossific nucleus in the treatment of developmental 
dysplasia of the hip. A meta-analysis.

Roposch A, Stöhr KK, Dobson M.

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, and
the Institute of Child Health, University College London, Great Ormond Street,
London WC1N 3JH, United Kingdom. a.roposch@ich.ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The role of the presence of the femoral head ossific nucleus as a
risk factor for the development of osteonecrosis of the femoral head in infants
with developmental dysplasia of the hip has been investigated in several small
studies, but the results have been inconsistent. The purpose of the present study
was to determine the effect of the presence of the ossific nucleus on the
development of osteonecrosis.
METHODS: A systematic review of the medical literature from 1966 to 2007 was
performed. Two independent reviewers evaluated all articles. Interrater agreement
was determined, and the quality of evidence was evaluated. A meta-analysis was
then performed with the main outcome defined as the development of osteonecrosis 
of the femoral head two years after reduction.
RESULTS: Six observational studies (five retrospective and one prospective) met
the inclusion criteria. Inconsistency was found in that half of the studies
demonstrated a protective effect of the ossific nucleus on the development of
osteonecrosis whereas half of the studies did not. A meta-analysis (including 358
patients) showed no significant effect of the presence of the ossific nucleus on 
the development of grades-I through IV osteonecrosis, with forty-one cases of
osteonecrosis (19%) found in infants in whom the ossific nucleus had been present
at the time of hip reduction compared with thirty cases (22%) in the group
without an ossific nucleus (relative risk=0.75, 95% confidence interval=0.46 to
1.21). When only radiographic changes of grade II or worse were considered to
represent osteonecrosis, a significant difference in the prevalence of
osteonecrosis was found, with fourteen cases of osteonecrosis (7%) in infants
with an ossific nucleus compared with eighteen cases (16%) in those without an
ossific nucleus (relative risk=0.43, 95% confidence interval=0.20 to 0.90). A
subgroup analysis showed that the presence of the ossific nucleus reduced the
probability of osteonecrosis by 60% (relative risk=0.41, 95% confidence
interval=0.18 to 0.91) after closed reduction, but no significant effect was
found in patients treated with open reduction (relative risk=1.14, 95% confidence
interval=0.62 to 2.07). All studies demonstrated methodological weaknesses
compromising the quality of evidence.
CONCLUSIONS: We did not find that the presence of the ossific nucleus had a
significant effect on the development of osteonecrosis of any grade after hip
reduction in infants with developmental dysplasia of the hip. The meta-analysis
suggested that the presence of the ossific nucleus has a protective effect
against the development of the more severe forms of femoral head osteonecrosis.
However, the quality of evidence is moderate, and additional research is likely
to have an important impact on the confidence in the estimate of the effect and
may change this estimate.


PMID: 19339576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Proc Inst Mech Eng H. 2009 Apr;223(3):315-27.

The importance of a thick cement mantle depends on stem geometry and stem-cement 
interfacial bonding.

Caruana J, Janssen D, Verdonschot N, Blunn GW.

Centre for Biomedical Engineering, Institute of Orthopaedics & Musculoskeletal
Science, University College London, Stanmore, UK. j.caruana@ucl.ac.uk

The thickness of the cement mantle around the femoral component of total hip
replacements is a contributing factor to aseptic loosening and revision.
Nevertheless, various designs of stems and surgical tooling lead to cement
mantles of different thicknesses. Opinion is divided on whether a thick mantle
enhances implant longevity. This study investigates the effect of cement mantle
thickness on accumulated damage in the cement, and how this is influenced by the 
presence or absence of a proximal collar and on whether the stem-cement interface
remains bonded. Three-dimensional finite element simulations incorporating creep 
and non-linear damage accumulation were performed to investigate cracking in the 
cement mantles around Stanmore Hips under physiologically informed stair-climbing
and gait loads. Cement mantle thickness, stem-cement interfacial bonding, and
collar design were varied to assess the interactive effects of these parameters. 
In all cases, damage levels were three to six times higher when the stem-cement
interface remained bonded. Cement mantle thickness had little effect on cement
damage accumulation around debonded collared stems but was critical in both
bonded and collarless cases, where a thicker mantle reduced cement cracking.
Damage around a smooth debonded stem with a collar is thus much less sensitive to
cement thickness than around bonded or collarless stems.


PMID: 19405437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2008 Dec;62(12):1355-63. Epub 2007 Aug 22.

Television viewing and obesity: a prospective study in the 1958 British birth
cohort.

Parsons TJ, Manor O, Power C.

Department of Paediatric Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Institute of Child
Health, University College London, London, UK. t.parsons@ich.ucl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether frequency of television viewing in adolescence (11
and 16 years) or early adulthood (23 years) affected subsequent changes in body
mass index (BMI) through to mid-adulthood life, and waist-hip ratio in
mid-adulthood.
SUBJECTS: The 1958 British birth cohort includes all births in 1 week in March
1958 in England, Scotland and Wales. The main analyses included at least 11 301
participants. Outcome measures included BMI at 16, 23, 33 and 45 years and
waist-hip ratio at 45 years.
RESULTS: Watching television 'often' at 16 years (but not 11 years) was
associated with a faster gain in BMI between 16 and 45 years in males (0.011 kg
m(-2) per year, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.003, 0.019) and females (0.013 kg 
m(-2) per year, 95%CI 0.003, 0.023). More frequent television viewing at 11, 16
and 23 years was associated with a faster gain in BMI between 23 and 45 years in 
females, but not in males. Television viewing at 23 years was associated with
waist-hip ratio at 45 years: participants watching > or = 5 times per week had a 
waist-hip ratio 0.01 higher than those watching less often. At 45 years, those
watching television for > or = 4 h day(-1) had a waist-hip ratio 0.03-0.04 higher
than those watching for <1 h day(-1).
CONCLUSIONS: More frequent television viewing in adolescence and early adulthood 
is associated with greater BMI gains through to mid-adulthood and with central
adiposity in mid-life. Television viewing may be a useful behaviour to target in 
strategies to prevent obesity.


PMID: 17717536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Am J Epidemiol. 2008 Nov 1;168(9):1008-15. Epub 2008 Sep 18.

Child-to-adult body mass index and height trajectories: a comparison of 2 British
birth cohorts.

Li L, Hardy R, Kuh D, Lo Conte R, Power C.

Centre for Paediatric Epidemiology and Biostatistics/Medical Research Council
Centre of Epidemiology for Child Health, Institute of Child Health, University
College London, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N1EH, United Kingdom.
L.Li@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Markers of growth and changes of body mass index (BMI) are associated with adult 
chronic disease risk. To better understand such associations, the authors
examined the 1946 (n approximately 5,300) and 1958 (n approximately 17,000)
British birth cohorts to establish how child-to-adult height and BMI have changed
across generations. Individuals born in 1958 were no heavier at birth than those 
born in 1946, but they were taller in childhood by about 1 cm on average, grew
faster thereafter, and were 3-4 cm taller by adolescence. The 1958 cohort
achieved adult height earlier and were taller by 1 cm, an increase that was
entirely due to their longer leg length. BMI trajectories diverged from early
adulthood, with a faster rate of BMI gain in the 1958 cohort than in the 1946
cohort, although the mean BMI at 7 years and rate of childhood gain had not shown
an increase. By midadulthood, the 1958 cohort had on average a greater BMI (1-2
kg/m(2)), larger waist (6-7 cm) and hip (5 cm) circumferences, and a higher
prevalence of obesity (25.1% vs. 10.8% in males and 23.7% vs. 14.8% in females). 
Changes in height and adiposity over a relatively short period of 12 years
suggest the likelihood of opposing trends of influences on later disease risk in 
these populations.


PMID: 18801885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Orthopedics. 2008 Sep;31(9):907-8.

Infection following hip replacement: solution options.

Haddad FS, Bridgens A.

University College London & Princess Grace Hospitals and Institute of
Orthopaedics, UCL, United Kingdom.

The key to the optimal management of an acutely infected arthroplasty is an
expeditious diagnosis with careful assessment of the mode of presentation and
treatment variables to determine the appropriate management strategy. At our
institution acute infection is managed early and aggressively with debridement
and exchange of mobile parts and change of the implant if it is cementless. For
established chronic infection, each case is considered individually, using
single-stage exchange in selected circumstances (1 in 6 cases). Two-stage
exchange with an articulating spacer is used in the remainder. Single-stage
revision offers clinical and economic advantages over a two-stage revision in
selected patients, and although ongoing evaluation is still in place, currently
we have had no reinfections in our single-stage revision cohort.


PMID: 18814609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Brain Behav Immun. 2008 Aug;22(6):941-8. Epub 2008 Mar 7.

Arterial stiffness and inflammatory response to psychophysiological stress.

Ellins E, Halcox J, Donald A, Field B, Brydon L, Deanfield J, Steptoe A.

Vascular Physiology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London,
30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

The processes through which psychological stress influences cardiovascular
disease are poorly understood, but may involve activation of hemodynamic,
neuroendocrine and inflammatory responses. We assessed the relationship between
carotid arterial stiffness and inflammatory responses to acute psychophysiologic 
stress. Participants were 155 healthy men and women aged 55.3, SD 2.7 years.
Blood samples for the assessment of plasma fibrinogen, tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) alpha and interleukin (IL) 6 were drawn at baseline, immediately following 
standardized behavioral tasks, and 45 min later. Carotid artery stiffness was
measured ultrasonically three years later, and blood pressure and heart rate
responses were recorded. The tasks induced substantial increases in blood
pressure and heart rate, together with increased fibrinogen, TNFalpha and IL-6
concentration. Carotid stiffness was positively associated with body mass,
waist/hip ratio, blood pressure, low density lipoprotein cholesterol, and
C-reactive protein, and inversely with high density lipoprotein and grade of
employment. Baseline levels of inflammatory variables were not related to carotid
artery stiffness. But carotid stiffness was greater in participants with larger
fibrinogen (p=0.037) and TNFalpha (p=0.036) responses to psychophysiological
stress. These effects were independent of age, gender, grade of employment,
smoking, body mass, waist/hip ratio, systolic and diastolic pressure, high and
low density lipoprotein cholesterol, and C-reactive protein. There were no
associations between carotid stiffness and stress responses in IL-6, blood
pressure, or heart rate. We conclude that individual differences in inflammatory 
responses to psychophysiological stress are independently related to structural
changes in artery walls that reflect increased cardiovascular disease risk.


PMID: 18316176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Eur J Endocrinol. 2008 Aug;159(2):179-85. Epub 2008 May 7.

Comparison of bone mineral density and body proportions between women with
complete androgen insensitivity syndrome and women with gonadal dysgenesis.

Han TS, Goswami D, Trikudanathan S, Creighton SM, Conway GS.

Department of Endocrinology, University College London Hospitals, 250 Euston
Road, London NW12PQ, UK.

OBJECTIVES: To compare bone mineral density (BMD) and body proportions between
women with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS) and with gonadal
dysgenesis (GD).
SETTING: Adult Disorders of Sexual Development and Ovarian Failure Clinics at
University College London Hospitals.
DESIGN: Retrospective cross-sectional study of three groups of women aged 17-58
years with varying degrees of exposure to sex hormones and different combinations
of sex chromosomes. Forty-six subjects had CAIS, 18 had GD and 46,XY (GD(XY)),
and 25 had GD and 46,XX (GD(XX)). In addition, body proportions of subgroups of
these women were analysed.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Oestrogen therapy, karyotype, anthropometry and BMD.
RESULTS: Height differed between groups (F ratio 5.2, P=0.007)), with GD(XX)
women being the shortest (mean+/-s.d.: 1.66+/-0.10 m), GD(XY) women the tallest
(1.74+/-0.09 m) and CAIS women were in-between (1.70+/-0.07 m). Delayed
gonadectomy resulted in taller stature in CAIS women (P=0.011). The ratio of
lower to upper body length in GD(XY) women was significantly (P=0.001) greater
than that of CAIS women. Multivariate logistic regression analysis (adjusted for 
age and height) showed that among women with XY karyotype, GD(XY) women were 5.2 
times (95% confidence interval (CI): 1.3-20.1, P=0.018) more likely than CAIS
women to have a low hip BMD. This difference was not evident among women with GD 
of different karyotypes (P=0.938). Spinal BMD did not differ between subject
groups. Further adjustment for oestrogen replacement did not alter these
relationships.
CONCLUSIONS: Taller stature in late gonadectomised CAIS women suggests an
oestrogen deficiency in these women prior to gonadectomy. Increased lower to
upper body ratio in GD(XY) women compared with the other groups implies that
these subjects have the greatest degree of oestrogen deficiency in puberty.
Androgen rather than sex chromosomes may play an important role in cortical bone 
mineralisation in CAIS women, probably via estrogen receptor-alpha either
directly or via aromatisation during critical periods of growth prior to
gonadectomy.


PMID: 18463105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Am J Clin Nutr. 2008 Jun;87(6):1876-82.

Association of age at menarche with cardiovascular risk factors, vascular
structure, and function in adulthood: the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns
study.

Kivimäki M, Lawlor DA, Smith GD, Elovainio M, Jokela M, Keltikangas-Järvinen L,
Vahtera J, Taittonen L, Juonala M, Viikari JS, Raitakari OT.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom. m.kivimaki@ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: It is unclear whether age at menarche is an independent determinant
of future cardiovascular risk.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine whether menarcheal age is an independent
predictor of body mass index (BMI) and a wide range of cardiovascular risk
factors in adolescence and adulthood.
DESIGN: We examined the associations of menarcheal age with BMI (in kg/m(2)) and 
other cardiovascular risk factors in adolescence and adulthood in a
population-based sample of 794 female adolescents aged 9-18 y at baseline. Their 
age at first menstruation was requested at baseline and again 3 and 6 y later.
Cardiovascular risk factors were assessed at baseline and at age 30-39 y.
RESULTS: A 1-y decrease in menarcheal age was associated with 0.81 (95% CI: 0.53,
1.08) higher adult BMI as well as greater waist circumference and waist-to-hip
ratio, elevated systolic blood pressure, higher insulin resistance, and greater
risk of metabolic syndrome (P < 0.05 for all). In multivariable analysis in which
these adult risk factors were mutually adjusted for, only the inverse association
between age at menarche and adult BMI remained. However, this inverse association
was lost after adjustment for premenarcheal BMI (beta: -0.16; 95% CI -0.55, 0.23;
P = 0.42). Higher premenarcheal BMI predicted earlier menarche, and the strong
association between premenarcheal BMI and adult BMI was robust to adjustment for 
age at menarche.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that early menarche is only a risk marker.
Greater childhood BMI seems to contribute to earlier age at menarche and, because
of tracking, greater adult BMI and associated cardiovascular risk. An independent
effect of early menarche on adult adiposity cannot be excluded, but it is likely 
to be small at best.


PMID: 18541580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Orthop Res. 2008 Jun;26(6):880-5.

Use of mesenchymal stem cells to enhance bone formation around revision hip
replacements.

Korda M, Blunn G, Goodship A, Hua J.

Centre for Biomedical Engineering, Institute of Orthopaedics and Musculo-Skeletal
Science, University College London, Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital Trust,
Brockley Hill, Stanmore, Middlesex HA7 4LP, United Kingdom.

Tissue engineering approaches to regenerate bone stock in revision total hip
replacements could enhance the longevity of the implant and benefit the quality
of the patient's life. This study investigated the impaction of allograft with
mesenchymal stem cells in an ovine hip hemiarthroplasty model. In total, 10 sheep
were divided into two groups with 5 sheep in each group. The groups were: 1)
mesenchymal stem cells mixed with allograft; 2) allograft only as a control.
Ground reaction force was assessed for limb function and showed that there was no
significant difference in the recovery for animals in different groups. The
amount of bone regenerated around the hip replacement was assessed using
un-decalcified histology. The results showed that the stem cell group generated
significantly more new bone at the implant-allograft interface and within the
graft than the control group. The results from this study indicate that the use
of stem cells on an allograft scaffold increases bone formation indicating that
the use of stem cells for revision hip arthroplasty may be beneficial for
patients undergoing revision surgery where the bone stock is compromised.


PMID: 18271017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2008 May;90(5):545-9.

Outcome measures for orthopaedic interventions on the hip.

Ashby E, Grocott MP, Haddad FS.

University College London Hospital, 235 Euston Road, London NW12BU, UK.
elizabethashby@doctors.org.uk

Orthopaedic outcome measures are used to evaluate the effect of operative
interventions. They are used for audit and research. Knowledge of these measures 
is becoming increasingly important with league tables comparing surgeons and
hospitals being made accessible to the profession and the general public. Several
types of tool are available to describe outcome after hip surgery such as generic
quality-of-life questionnaires, disease-specific quality-of-life questionnaires, 
hip-specific outcome measures and general short-term clinical measures. We
provide an overview of the outcome measures commonly used to evaluate hip
interventions.


PMID: 18450615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Orthop Res. 2008 May;26(5):693-703.

Prevention of strain-related osteopenia in aseptic loosening of hip prostheses
using perioperative bisphosphonate.

Goodship AE, Blunn GW, Green J, Coathup MJ.

The Institute of Orthopaedics and Musculoskeletal Science, University College
London, The Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital Trust, Brockley Hill, Stanmore,
Middlesex HA7 4LP, United Kingdom.

The hypothesis tested in this study was that perioperative administration of the 
bisphosphonate zoledronate will reduce strain protection-related calcar
osteopenia and maintain functional integration of the femoral component in an
ovine hemiarthroplasty model. Twelve sheep received a unilateral cemented
hemiarthroplasty where six animals were given nine intravenous infusions of
zoledronate (10 microg/kg) pre-, peri-, and postsurgery over 8 months. Control
animals received physiological saline only. Implants remained in vivo for 9
months. Ground reaction force (GRF) was used to assess functional loading of the 
implanted limb, bone mineral density (BMD) was quantified using dual energy X-ray
absorptiometry (DEXA). Cortical bone area, thickness, and viable osteocytes were 
assessed histologically. No significant differences in GRF data between groups
was identified. Results demonstrated a significant drop in BMD values in the
control group (9.7%) when compared with the bisphosphonate-treated group (3.2%)
(p = 0.0159). Histological results showed that cortical area, thickness, and the 
percentage of lacunae with viable osteocytes was significantly greater in the
bisphosphonate-treated group when compared with control (p = 0.002, p = 0.001, p 
= 0.003, respectively). The administration of zoledronate reduced cortical
osteopenia in the calcar region of the proximal femur and this therapy could be
used as a preventive measure to combat strain protection osteopenia and its
contribution to associated aseptic loosening in total hip replacement surgery.


PMID: 18050308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2008 Feb;90(2):246-53.

Impaction grafting with a bone-graft substitute in a sheep model of revision hip 
replacement.

Coathup M, Smith N, Kingsley C, Buckland T, Dattani R, Ascroft GP, Blunn G.

Centre for Biomedical Engineering, Institute of Orthopaedics and Musculoskeletal 
Science University College London, The Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital,
Brockley Hill, Stanmore, Middlesex HA7 4LP, UK.

An experimental sheep model was used for impaction allografting of 12
hemiarthroplasty femoral components placed into two equal-sized groups. In group 
1, a 50:50 mixture of ApaPore hydroxyapatite bone-graft substitute and allograft 
was used. In group 2, ApaPore and allograft were mixed in a 90:10 ratio. Both
groups were killed at six months. Ground reaction force results demonstrated no
significant differences (p > 0.05) between the two groups at 8, 16 and 24 weeks
post-operatively, and all animals remained active. The mean bone turnover rates
were significantly greater in group 1, at 0.00206 mm/day, compared to group 2 at 
0.0013 mm/day (p < 0.05). The results for the area of new bone formation
demonstrated no significant differences (p > 0.05) between the two groups. No
significant differences were found between the two groups in thickness of the
cement mantle (p > 0.05) and percentage ApaPore-bone contact (p > 0.05). The
results of this animal study demonstrated that a mixture of ApaPore allograft in 
a 90:10 ratio was comparable to using a 50:50 mixture.


PMID: 18256099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Am J Epidemiol. 2008 Jan 1;167(1):96-102. Epub 2007 Oct 4.

Neuroendocrine and inflammatory factors associated with positive affect in
healthy men and women: the Whitehall II study.

Steptoe A, O'Donnell K, Badrick E, Kumari M, Marmot M.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom. a.steptoe@ucl.ac.uk

Positive affective states are associated with favorable health outcomes, but the 
underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. The authors assessed associations
between positive affect, cortisol sampled over the day, and inflammatory markers 
(C-reactive protein and interleukin-6) among 2,873 healthy members of the
Whitehall II study. Data for this study were collected in 2002-2004 in London,
United Kingdom. Saliva free cortisol was assessed on waking, 30 minutes later,
and four times over the day and evening. Positive affect was indexed by
aggregating ecological momentary assessments of positive mood over the day.
Salivary cortisol averaged over the day was inversely associated with positive
affect after controlling for age, gender, income, ethnicity, body mass index,
waist/hip ratio, smoking, paid employment, time of waking in the morning, and
depression (p = 0.003). There was no association with cortisol responses to
waking. The adjusted odds of C-reactive protein >/=3.00 mg/liter was 1.89 (95%
confidence interval: 1.08, 3.31) in low- compared with high-positive-affect
women, and plasma interleukin-6 was also inversely related to positive affect in 
women (p = 0.016). Neither inflammatory marker was related to positive affect in 
men. These results confirm findings from smaller studies relating cortisol with
positive affect while suggesting that in women, positive affect is associated
with reduced levels of inflammatory markers.


PMID: 17916595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Epilepsy Behav. 2008 Jan;12(1):165-9. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

The representation of epilepsy in popular music.

Baxendale S.

Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, UK.
sallieb@ion.ucl.ac.uk

Much can be learned about the contemporary stereotypes associated with epilepsy
by studying the representation of the disorder in paintings, literature, and
movies. Popular music is arguably the most accessible and ubiquitous of the
creative art forms, touching most of us on a daily basis. Reviewed here are the
ways in which epilepsy and seizures are used in the lyrics of musicians from a
wide variety of musical genres, from hip-hop to rhythm and blues. Many of the
ancient associations of epilepsy with madness, horror, and lunacy can be found in
these lyrics. However, the language of epilepsy has also been appropriated by
some musical artists to represent a state of sexual ecstasy and dance euphoria.
The references to these states as "epilepsy" or a "seizure" in numerous songs
suggest that this shorthand is widely recognized within some subcultures.
Although epilepsy has frequently been associated with female sexual availability 
in other creative art forms, this novel use of the language of epilepsy
represents a contemporary departure in the artistic application of
epilepsy-related images and associations in the 21st century.


PMID: 17980673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Eur J Epidemiol. 2008;23(8):573-9. Epub 2008 Apr 12.

The association between father's social class and adult obesity is not explained 
by educational attainment and an unhealthy lifestyle in adulthood.

Heraclides A, Witte D, Brunner EJ.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Royal Free and University College
London Medical School, London, UK. a.heraclides@ucl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the effect of father's social class on central and
general obesity in adulthood. To test the role of educational attainment and
adult health behaviours as mediators in this association.
METHODS: BMI, Waist-hip-ratio, smoking status, alcohol consumption, leisure-time 
physical activity and dietary intake (semi-quantitative food-frequency
questionnaire) were assessed at phase 5 (1997-1998) of the Whitehall II cohort
study. We used retrospective data on educational attainment and father's social
class. Our study sample was 4598 participants (3364 men, 1234 women) aged 44-69, 
with a valid obesity measure and information on father's social class and
educational attainment.
RESULTS: Father's social class was inversely associated with adult life central
(Waist-hip-ratio) and general (BMI) obesity in women but not in men. For example,
mean BMI difference between the highest and lowest childhood social class was
2.04 kg/m(2) (95% confidence intervals: 0.90; 3.18). These associations remained 
robust to adjustment for adult life socioeconomic position. Adjusting for
educational attainment resulted in a reduction of 10-15% in the difference in
mean obesity measures between lowest and highest father's social class. In our
fully adjusted model, adult life health behaviours did not provide further
attenuation of the effect of father's social class on adult obesity.
CONCLUSION: We provide evidence for an independent effect of father's social
class on adult central and general obesity in women, which is not explained by
educational attainment and an unhealthy lifestyle in adulthood. Policies aiming
at reducing inequalities in obesity should tackle the problem of social
inequality early in life.


PMID: 18409006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Clin Chem. 2007 Dec;53(12):2078-85. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

IL18 haplotypes are associated with serum IL-18 concentrations in a
population-based study and a cohort of individuals with premature coronary heart 
disease.

Thompson SR, McCaskie PA, Beilby JP, Hung J, Jennens M, Chapman C, Thompson P,
Humphries SE.

Department of Cardiovascular Genetics, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Interleukin (IL)-18 is a proinflammatory cytokine that has been
implicated in several diseases, including atherosclerosis, and increased
circulating IL-18 concentrations increase risk of future coronary heart disease
(CHD). We evaluated the effect of common variation within the IL18 gene on
concentrations of circulating IL-18.
METHODS: We measured IL-18, by ELISA, in the population-based study group
[Carotid Ultrasound Disease Assessment Study (CUDAS)] and a predominantly male
cohort with premature cardiovascular disease [Carotid Ultrasound in Patients with
Ischaemic Heart Disease (CUPID)]. Using a tagging single-nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) approach that captured >90% of genetic variation, we identified 4 common
(>10%) haplotypes.
RESULTS: A common SNP was associated with differences in IL-18 concentrations; in
CUDAS individuals carrying 2 copies of the rare allele, concentrations were 13%
higher than in those with no copies (P = 0.002). Haplotypes were also associated 
with significant differences in IL-18 concentrations in CUDAS and CUPID.
Haplotype GTATA (frequency 23%) was associated with significantly lower IL-18
than others. In CUDAS, those carrying 2 copies had IL-18 concentrations 15% lower
than those carrying no copies (P = 0.002); in CUPID, the difference was 22% (P = 
0.004). These associations remained significant after adjustment for age, sex,
hypertension, HDL cholesterol, waist-to-hip ratio, and alcohol consumption.
Despite being associated with differences in IL-18 concentrations, the haplotypes
did not occur at different frequencies in those with or without carotid
atherosclerotic plaques.
CONCLUSIONS: Variation within IL18 affects IL-18 concentrations in healthy and
diseased individuals and thus may influence the pathophysiology of plaques at all
stages of CHD progression.


PMID: 17962365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Heart. 2007 Dec;93(12):1567-70. Epub 2007 May 8.

Socioeconomic status, pathogen burden and cardiovascular disease risk.

Steptoe A, Shamaei-Tousi A, Gylfe A, Henderson B, Bergström S, Marmot M.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, 1-19
Torrington Place, London WC1E 6BT, UK. a.steptoe@ucl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Heart. 2008 Aug;94(8):1075; author reply 1075.

OBJECTIVE: Socioeconomic status (SES) is inversely associated with coronary heart
disease (CHD) risk. Cumulative pathogen burden may also predict future CHD. The
hypothesis was tested that lower SES is associated with a greater pathogen
burden, and that pathogen burden accounts in part for SES differences in
cardiovascular risk factors.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional observational study involving the clinical
examination of 451 men and women aged 51-72 without CHD, recruited from the
Whitehall II epidemiological cohort. SES was defined by grade of employment, and 
pathogen burden by summing positive serostatus for Chlamydia pneumoniae,
cytomegalovirus and herpes simplex virus 1. Cardiovascular risk factors were also
assessed.
RESULTS: Pathogen burden averaged 1.94 (SD) 0.93 in the lower grade group,
compared with 1.64 (0.97) and 1.64 (0.93) in the intermediate and higher grade
groups (p = 0.011). Pathogen burden was associated with a higher body mass index,
waist/hip ratio, blood pressure and incidence of diabetes. There were SES
differences in waist/hip ratio, high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol, fasting
glucose, glycated haemoglobin, lung function, smoking and diabetes. The SES
gradient in these cardiovascular risk factors was unchanged when pathogen burden 
was taken into account statistically.
CONCLUSIONS: Although serological signs of infection with common pathogens are
more frequent in lower SES groups, their distribution across the social gradient 
does not match the linear increases in CHD risk present across higher,
intermediate and lower SES groups. Additionally, pathogen burden does not appear 
to mediate SES differences in cardiovascular risk profiles.


PMCID: PMC2095775
PMID: 17488763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Atherosclerosis. 2007 Nov;195(1):e48-57. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

Prevalence of cardiovascular risk factors among ethnic groups: results from the
Health Surveys for England.

Zaninotto P, Mindell J, Hirani V.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, 1-19
Torrington Place, WC1E 7HB London, UK. p.zaninotto@ucl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: To identify independent risk factors associated with cardiovascular
disease (CVD) and diabetes for each minority ethnic group and the general
population in England and explore the independent association of ethnicity and
CVD and diabetes.
PARTICIPANTS: Nationally representative samples of 2362 Black Caribbean, 2467
Indian, 2204 Pakistanis, 1985 Bangladeshis, 1385 Chinese, 2398 Irish, and 30,744 
adults from the general population living in private households.
RESULTS: CVD was relatively more common among: Indian and Chinese men with high
waist-hip ratio; Indian, Bangladeshi and Irish with diabetes; Black Caribbean,
Indian and Pakistani with hypertension; Bangladeshi and Pakistani ex-smokers and 
Indian ex-smokers and current-smokers; Pakistani that were moderate-drinkers and 
Indian heavy drinkers; Black Carribean Indian, Pakistani and Irish physically
inactive; Pakistani in manual social class; and Bangladeshi in low income. Black 
Caribbean, Bangladeshi and Chinese participants and Indian and Pakistani women
had significantly lower odds ratios of having CVD, compared with the general
population. The odds of having diabetes were significantly higher for Black
Caribbean, Indian, Pakistani and Bangladeshi, Chinese (men only) than
participants from the general population.
CONCLUSIONS: CVD prevention through control of risk factors, especially diabetes 
and hypertension, should not only address the general population, but also target
people from these groups.


PMID: 17395185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Br J Health Psychol. 2007 Nov;12(Pt 4):559-70.

Psychosocial factors related to cardiovascular disease risk in UK South Asian
men: a preliminary study.

Williams ED, Kooner I, Steptoe A, Kooner JS.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, UK.
emily.williams@ucl.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Br J Health Psychol. 2008 Feb;13(Pt 1):188.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the exposure to psychosocial factors associated with
cardiovascular risk in UK South Asian and white European men.
DESIGN: Interview study of 63 healthy UK South Asian and 42 white European men
aged 35-75 years, randomly selected from a larger study group in West London.
Interviews were administered in Punjabi and English. Measures of psychosocial and
cardiovascular risk factors were obtained.
SETTING: Ealing Hospital, West London.
RESULTS: The South Asian men had lived in the UK for an average of 27.9 (SD 11.6)
years, and had higher educational attainment than the white Europeans. Compared
with the white Europeans, the South Asian men lived in significantly more crowded
homes, experienced lower job control, greater financial strain, lower
neighbourhood social cohesion and more racial harassment. They received less
emotional support, and were more depressed and less optimistic on standard
questionnaires. These men also had higher waist/hip ratios and were more
sedentary, but there were no significant ethnic differences in biological risk
factors.
CONCLUSIONS: South Asian men living in London showed a higher risk profile in
psychosocial factors thought to contribute to cardiovascular disease risk. This
preliminary investigation is consistent with the possibility that psychosocial
adversity contributes to increased vulnerability to coronary heart disease in
South Asians resident in the UK.


PMID: 17931473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Acta Orthop Belg. 2007 Oct;73(5):558-65.

Revision of the femoral prosthesis with impaction allografting.

Dattani R, Blunn G.

University College London, Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital, Brockley Hill,
Stanmore, UK. rupendattani@hotmail.com

Impaction allografting is the only technique, to date, that has been shown to
reverse the loss of bone stock encountered during revision hip arthroplasty.
However, early stem subsidence, dislocations and a high occurrence of
periprosthetic fractures are well documented with this method. This article
reviews the biomechanical and biological characteristics of compacted morsellised
graft, on the femoral side, and examines the clinical results of this technique
and its future development.


PMID: 18019909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Int J Psychophysiol. 2007 Mar;63(3):275-82. Epub 2007 Jan 17.

Family history of cardiovascular disease is associated with cardiovascular
responses to stress in healthy young men and women.

Wright CE, O'Donnell K, Brydon L, Wardle J, Steptoe A.

Psychobiology Group, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University
College London, 1-19 Torrington Place, London, UK. caroline.wright@mssm.edu

Heightened cardiovascular stress responsivity is associated with cardiovascular
disease, but the origins of heightened responsivity are unclear. The present
study investigated whether disturbances in cardiovascular responsivity were
evident in individuals with a family history of cardiovascular disease risk. Data
were collected from 60 women and 31 men with an average age of 21.4 years. Family
history of cardiovascular disease risk was defined by the presence of coronary
heart disease, hypertension, diabetes or high cholesterol in participants'
parents and grandparents; 75 participants had positive, and 16 had negative
family histories. Systolic and diastolic blood pressure (BP), heart rate and
heart rate variability were measured continuously for 5 min periods at baseline, 
during two mental stress tasks (Stroop and speech task) and at 10-15 min, 25-30
min and 40-45 min post-stress. Individuals with a positive family history
exhibited significantly greater diastolic BP reactivity and poorer systolic and
diastolic BP recovery from the stressors in comparison with family history
negative individuals. In addition, female participants with a positive family
history had heightened heart rate and heart rate variability reactivity to
stressors. These effects were independent of baseline cardiovascular activity,
body mass index, waist to hip ratio and smoking status. Family history of
hypertension alone was not associated with stress responsivity. The findings
indicate that a family history of cardiovascular disease risk influences stress
responsivity which may in turn contribute to risk of future cardiovascular
disorders.


PMID: 17234292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Soc Psychol. 2007 Feb;147(1):15-26.

Male physical attractiveness in Britain and Greece: a cross-cultural study.

Swami V, Smith J, Tsiokris A, Georgiades C, Sangareau Y, Tovée MJ, Furnham A.

Department of Psychology, University College London. virenswami@hotmail.com

The waist-to-chest ratio (WCR), body mass index (BMI), and waist-to-hip ratio
(WHR) are the major cues to women's ratings of men's bodily attractiveness (J. T.
Fan, W. Dai, F. Liu, & J. Wu, 2005; D. M. Maisey, E. L. E. Vale, P. L.
Cornelissen, & M. J. Tovée, 1999; V. Swami & M. J. Tovée, 2005b). The authors
examined the relative importance of each of these cues cross-culturally in Greece
and Britain. Participants were 36 British and 40 Greek women who rated a set of
images of real men with known WCR, BMI, and WHR. The results showed that,
regardless of the cultural setting, WCR was the primary determinant of men's
physical attractiveness to women, with BMI playing a minor role. However, there
were also cross-cultural differences: The Greek women showed a stronger
preference for a lower WCR and smaller overall body weight than did the British
women. The authors considered possible explanations of these findings.


PMID: 17345919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Radiology. 2006 Dec;241(3):854-60. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

Developmental dysplasia of the hip: quality of reporting of diagnostic accuracy
for US.

Roposch A, Moreau NM, Uleryk E, Doria AS.

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children,
Institute of Child Health, University College London, Great Ormond St, London
WC1N 3JH, England. a.roposch@ich.ucl.ac.uk

PURPOSE: To systematically review the quality of diagnostic accuracy reporting in
studies on the use of ultrasonography (US) for the diagnosis of developmental
dysplasia of the hip (DDH). MATERIALS AND METHOds: A systematic review of the
MEDLINE, EMBASE, DARE, and Cochrane Library databases was performed by using a
validated search strategy. Two independent reviewers evaluated articles by using 
the Standards for Reporting of Diagnostic Accuracy (STARD) and Quality Assessment
of Studies of Diagnostic Accuracy included in Systematic Reviews (QUADAS)
statements. Items were reported individually for STARD and QUADAS because these
instruments do not incorporate a summary score. A simple kappa statistic with 95%
confidence intervals was used to measure the level of agreement between the two
reviewers.
RESULTS: Ten studies were included. In three studies, reliability was
investigated, and in seven studies elements of both validity and reliability were
investigated. In no study did the authors adequately report more than 40% of the 
STARD items. The quality of methods that were used in the studies was poor. Only 
one (14%) of seven studies provided information on more than 50% of the QUADAS
items. All studies included a good description of image acquisition, but data
analysis was imperfect and lacked estimates of diagnostic accuracy and precision.
Authors tended to overinterpret their results.
CONCLUSION: Overall, there was imperfect reporting of diagnostic accuracy in
studies on the use of US for diagnosis of DDH.


PMID: 17053199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Comput Aided Surg. 2006 Nov;11(6):322-6.

The transverse pelvic plane: a new and practical reference frame for hip
arthroplasty.

Dandachli W, Richards R, Sauret V, Cobb JP.

University College London, UK. wdandachli@sky.com

Acetabular orientation is a crucial part of the planning and performance of hip
arthroplasty. Currently, most surgeons use the anterior pelvic plane (APP) to
orient themselves when navigating the acetabulum, despite the fact that the
anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS) of the unaffected side is not accessible in 
the lateral position. We have identified another plane, the transverse pelvic
plane (TPP), relying on both posterior superior iliac spines and the ASIS of the 
affected side. In a CT-based study, this plane was found to be as reliable as the
APP for the orientation of the cup in both anteversion and inclination. The
substantial variation in both measurements between patients is documented, and
their relation to the "safe zone" is shown. We recommend consideration of the TPP
by surgeons who perform arthroplasty in the lateral position. It may reduce
operating time and improve accuracy in computer-assisted arthroplasty.


PMID: 17458767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Br J Hosp Med (Lond). 2006 Jun;67(6):294-8.

Novel strategies in joint replacement.

Jenabzadeh AR, Haddad FS.

University College London Hospital, London W1U 5NY.

As the need for hip and knee replacement continues to increase, technical and
material changes have allowed a dramatic evolution in the way that degenerative, 
inflammatory and traumatic arthritis are managed. Advances include new bearing
surfaces which should have greater longevity, minimal incision joint replacement,
computer guidance and partial joint resurfacing for younger patients. These
advances and their implications are discussed.


PMID: 16821731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2006 Jun;447:119-24.

Determining the reliability of the Graf classification for hip dysplasia.

Roposch A, Graf R, Wright JG.

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children,
University College London, London, UK. a.roposch@ich.ucl.ac.uk

We sought to establish the levels of interrater reliability and intrarater
reliability of the Graf classification among orthopaedic surgeons in their final 
training year and who learned the method by instructed teaching or self study.
Using standard teaching material developed by Graf, two groups of senior
orthopaedic residents at the same training level received structured teaching
sessions (Group A, n = 2) or performed self study (Group B, n = 2). Interrater
reliability and intrarater reliability were determined (Cohen's weighted kappa). 
Proportions of correctly rated sonograms were compared between groups,
implications of misclassifications were analyzed, and sensitivity analyses were
performed. Interrater reliability was 0.59 (95% CI = 0.32-0.85) for Group A, and 
0.47 (95% CI = 0.14-0.79) for Group B. Intrarater reliability showed an overall
kappa of 0.57 (95% CI = 0.35-0.78) in Group A, and 0.47 (95% CI = 0.19-0.75) in
Group B. The proportion of correctly rated sonograms between groups was similar
in the original dataset and in the sensitivity analysis. Misclassifications
influencing treatment were infrequent; one patient would have received
unwarranted treatment and three patients would not have received warranted
treatment. The Graf classification showed moderate reliability. Using self study,
it can be learned almost, but not quite as effectively as by a structured
program.


PMID: 16505707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Psychol Health Med. 2006 May;11(2):129-41.

The relative influence of facial neoteny and waist-to-hip ratio on judgements of 
female attractiveness and fecundity.

Furnham A, Reeves E.

Department of Psychology, University College London, London WC1H OAP, UK.
a.furnham@ucl.ac.uk

Numerous studies have demonstrated that waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) affects
perceptions of female physical attractiveness and fecundity. This study tested
the assumption that facial attractiveness explained more variance in overall
ratings and fecundity than WHR, when the latter is manipulated within the normal 
range (0.67 - 0.85). One hundred and sixty-one participants (mean age = 21.5)
rated the attractiveness, youthfulness, fertility, healthiness and likelihood of 
being pregnant for 27 photographs of three females in which facial attractiveness
in terms of neoteny (three levels) and WHR (three levels) had been systematically
digitally manipulated. Facial attractiveness exerted a significant influence on
judgements of attractiveness, youthfulness, fertility and healthiness, whereas
WHR only affected likelihood of being pregnant. Results are interpreted in terms 
of neotenous facial attractiveness providing potential mates with information
concerning phenotypic and genetic quality.


PMID: 17129903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2006 Apr;77(4):468-73.

Predictors of falls and fractures in bradykinetic rigid syndromes: a
retrospective study.

Williams DR, Watt HC, Lees AJ.

Reta Lila Weston Institute of Neurological Studies, University College London W1T
4JF, UK.

BACKGROUND: Falls and fractures contribute to morbidity and mortality in
bradykinetic rigid syndromes.
METHODS: The authors performed a retrospective case notes review at the Queen
Square Brain Bank for Neurological Disorders and systematically explored the
relation between clinical features and falls and fractures in 782 pathologically 
diagnosed cases (474 with Parkinson's disease (PD); 127 progressive supranuclear 
palsy (PSP); 91 multiple system atrophy (MSA); 46 dementia with Lewy bodies
(DLB); 27 vascular parkinsonism; nine Alzheimer's disease; eight corticobasal
degeneration).
RESULTS: Falls were recorded in 606 (77.5%) and fractures in 134 (17.1%). In PD, 
female gender, symmetrical onset, postural instability, and autonomic instability
all independently predicted time to first fall. In PD, PSP, and MSA latency to
first fall was shortest in those with older age of onset of disease. Median
latency from disease onset to first fall was shortest in Richardson's syndrome
(12 months), MSA (42), and PSP-parkinsonism (47), and longest in PD (108). In all
patients fractures of the hip were more than twice as common as wrist and forearm
fractures. Fractures of the skull, ribs, and vertebrae occurred more frequently
in PSP than in other diseases.
CONCLUSION: Measures to prevent the morbidity associated with falls and fractures
in bradykinetic rigid syndromes may be best directed at patients with the risk
factors identified in this study.


PMCID: PMC2077491
PMID: 16543524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2006 Mar;88(3):310-4.

The Kent hip prosthesis: an evaluation of 145 prostheses after a mean of 5.1
years.

Sexton SA, Stossel CA, Haddad FS.

1St Helier Hospital, Wrythe Lane, Carshalton, Surrey SM5 1AA, and University
College London Hospital, UK. shaunsexton@doctors.org.uk

The Kent hip is a distally-locked femoral stem which was developed to address
severe proximal bone loss, severe bony deformity and peri-prosthetic fracture. We
reviewed the results of 145 consecutive Kent hips implanted into 141 patients
between 1987 and 2000. The indications for implantation were aseptic loosening
(75 hips), septic loosening (two), peri-prosthetic and prosthetic fracture (37), 
severe bony deformity (24), and fracture through a proximal femoral metastasis
(seven). The median time to full weight-bearing after surgery was two days and
the mean length of follow-up was 5.1 years (2 to 15). Further revisions were
required for 13 femoral stems. With removal of the stem for any reason as an
end-point, the cumulative survival at five, ten and 15 years was 93%, 89% and
77%, respectively. In patients aged>or=70 years, the cumulative survival at 15
years was 92%, compared with 68% in those aged<70 years. Because of these
findings, we recommend the use of interlocking stems in patients aged>or=70
years, particularly in those with a peri-prosthetic fracture, for whom
alternative methods are limited. Outcome scores and survival data, compared with 
other systems, indicate that the Kent hip should be used with caution in younger 
patients.


PMID: 16498002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Tissue Eng. 2006 Mar;12(3):625-30.

Can mesenchymal stem cells survive under normal impaction force in revision total
hip replacements?

Korda M, Blunn G, Phipps K, Rust P, Di Silvio L, Coathup M, Goodship A, Hua J.

Centre for Biomedical Engineering, University College London, United Kingdom.

Impaction allograft as a scaffold for bone-forming cells is a tissue-engineering 
approach for filling bone defects that are commonly encountered during revision
total joint replacement (THR). The purpose of this in vitro study is to assess
the viability of mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) grown on allograft following
impaction using forces similar to those measured during revision total hip
replacements. Impaction forces of 0, 3, 6, and 9 kN were used representing normal
and high impact. The results showed that the viability in the 3 and 6 kN groups
was not significantly reduced compared with that of the 0 kN group, while the
survival of the MSCs was significantly reduced after 9 kN impaction force. This
study suggests that the addition of MSCs to the allograft scaffold will survive
normal impaction force in revision THR.


PMID: 16579695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Int J Obes (Lond). 2005 Nov;29(11):1329-37.

Cardiovascular stress responsivity, body mass and abdominal adiposity.

Steptoe A, Wardle J.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, UK.
a.steptoe@ucl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: To assess the relationship between adiposity and cardiovascular stress
reactivity and recovery in middle-aged men and women, and investigate the
influence of impaired poststress cardiovascular recovery on changes in body mass 
index (BMI) and waist-hip ratio over 3 y.
PARTICIPANTS: In total, 225 healthy men and women aged 47-59 y were recruited
from the British civil service.
METHODS: Laboratory mental stress testing was carried out, with blood pressure
(BP), cardiac output and total peripheral resistance being measured at baseline, 
during moderately challenging tasks, and during recovery 40-45 min poststress.
Weight, height, waist and hip circumference were assessed at the time of mental
stress testing and 3 y later.
RESULTS: Behavioural tasks elicited increases in BP sustained by a combination of
cardiac activation and raised peripheral resistance. BMI and waist/hip ratio were
associated cross-sectionally with impaired poststress recovery of systolic
pressure, diastolic pressure and cardiac index independently of age, gender,
socioeconomic status, smoking, alcohol consumption and baseline cardiovascular
activity. Increases in waist-hip ratio over 3 y were predicted both by impaired
poststress recovery of systolic pressure and cardiac index in men, independently 
of baseline adiposity and other covariates. No associations between subjective
stress and BMI or waist-hip ratio were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Disturbances of cardiovascular responsivity to psychological stress,
manifest through impaired poststress recovery, were associated cross-sectionally 
with BMI, and longitudinally with central adiposity in men. Stress-related
cardiovascular dysregulation may contribute to obesity risk.


PMID: 15953935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Biomaterials. 2005 Jul;26(19):4161-9.

Role of hydroxyapatite coating in resisting wear particle migration and
osteolysis around acetabular components.

Coathup MJ, Blackburn J, Goodship AE, Cunningham JL, Smith T, Blunn GW.

The Centre for Biomedical Engineering, Institute of Orthopaedics and
Musculo-Skeletal Science, University College London, The Royal National
Orthopaedic Hospital Trust, Brockley Hill, Stanmore, Middlesex HA7 4LP, UK.
m.coathup@ucl.ac.uk

The main problem facing the longevity of total joint replacements is wear
particle-induced osteolysis, particularly around the acetabular component. Ovine 
Total Hip Replacement surgery was performed with roughened femoral heads in order
to enhance wear debris generation in vivo. The resistance to aseptic loosening of
acetabular components with different surface coatings was investigated. Implants 
remained in vivo for 1 year. Sheep were randomly assigned to one of six
experimental groups where the acetabular cup was fixed utilising an: (a) cemented
polyethylene acetabular cup, (b) metal backed grit blasted surface, (c) metal
backed plasma sprayed titanium porous coating, (d) metal backed sintered beaded
coating, (e) Hydroxyapatite (HA)-coated grit blasted surface (f) and HA-coated
porous components. Ground Reaction Force (GRF) was used to asses the functional
performance of the implants and data was collected pre-operatively and at 12, 24,
36 and 52 weeks post op. Wear debris generated was analysed and radiographs taken
prior to preparation of thin sections. Fibrous tissue (FT) thickness and bone
contact at 1 mm intervals along the acetabular bone-implant interface was
calculated. GRF data demonstrated significant differences between experimental
groups. In all groups there was an increase in the function of the hip after
surgery and up to 24 weeks but thereafter the function of the group with the grit
blasted surface reduced whereas the function of the other groups did not
significantly change. Average wear particles generated were <1 microm in size.
The cemented group demonstrated a significantly thicker average FT layer (2.69
mm) when compared with all other groups (p<0.05 in all cases) except the grit
blasted group (1.56 mm). HA porous coated cups demonstrated significantly least
fibrous tissue adjacent to its interface when compared with all other groups
(cemented p<0.05, grit blasted p=0.029, porous p<0.05, sintered beads p<0.05 and 
HA grit blasted p<0.05). Significantly increased bone contact to HA-coated porous
cups (73.33%) when compared with all groups was identified except HA-coated grit 
blasted cups where no significant difference was demonstrated. Radiographic signs
of loosening were visible in all groups except the HA-coated porous group.
Results demonstrated that HA porous coated acetabular components significantly
enhanced bone ingrowth in the presence of wear particles, preventing their
migration and reducing osteolysis. Non-HA-coated porous and sintered beaded
components provided a more effective seal against the ingress of wear debris when
compared with cemented cups.


PMID: 15664643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2005 Jul;30(6):582-90.

Subjective socioeconomic position, gender and cortisol responses to waking in an 
elderly population.

Wright CE, Steptoe A.

Psychobiology Group, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University
College London, 1-19 Torrington Place, London WC1E 6BT, UK. c.e.wright@ucl.ac.uk

Socioeconomic inequalities in morbidity and mortality exist, but the
psychobiological pathways that link social status and health are less clear. It
has previously been reported that socioeconomic status is inversely associated
with the magnitude of the cortisol response to awakening (CAR) in men and women
of working age. In the present study, we tested whether larger cortisol responses
would be present in an older retired population, and whether the CAR differed
between men and women. The extent to which adherence to saliva sample timing also
affects the CAR was investigated. Ninety three men and women aged 65-80 years
took saliva samples on waking, and then 10, 20, 30 and 60 min after waking.
Subjective social status was assessed using the 'ladder' measure devised by Adler
et al. (2000). Non-compliance was defined as a reported delay of 10 min or more
between waking and taking the first saliva sample. Cortisol levels on waking were
significantly higher in the non-compliant individuals, and the CAR was blunted
compared with that of compliant participants. With non-compliant participants
eliminated from the analyses, we found that low social status was associated with
a larger CAR after adjusting for gender, waist/hip ratio, body mass index,
smoking, time of waking, chronic illness, prescription medication, education and 
financial strain. No association was found between CAR and education or financial
strain. Women also had significantly larger CARs, independent of socioeconomic
position. The results highlight the importance of controlling for non-compliance 
and are consistent with the notion that higher socioeconomic position protects
against stress-related activation of psychobiological pathways which may
contribute to variation in disease risk evident in old age.


PMID: 15808928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2004 Sep;28(9):1168-73.

Central adiposity and cortisol responses to waking in middle-aged men and women.

Steptoe A, Kunz-Ebrecht SR, Brydon L, Wardle J.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, London, 
UK. a.steptoe@ucl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: Central obesity is associated with disturbances of
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical (HPA) axis function. We investigated
whether central adiposity indexed by waist/hip ratio is related to cortisol
responses to waking and other measures of salivary cortisol over the working day.
PARTICIPANTS: In total, 89 men and 83 women aged 47-59 y recruited from the
British civil service. All were members of the Whitehall II epidemiological
cohort.
METHODS: Saliva samples were collected on waking, 30 min later, and then at 2-h
intervals from 0800-0830 to 2200-2230. A strict procedure for excluding
individuals who did not adhere to the sampling schedule was applied.
RESULTS: Waist/hip ratio in men was positively correlated with the cortisol
response to waking (30 min-waking value) after adjusting for age, socioeconomic
position, smoking status, alcohol consumption, time of waking, and cortisol level
on waking (r=0.29, P=0.009). The cortisol response to waking was negatively
related to high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol (r=-0.25) and positively
with total/HDL cholesterol ratio (r=0.25). Associations between the decline in
cortisol over the day and waist/hip ratio, HDL cholesterol and total/HDL
cholesterol ratios were also significant. No associations were significant in
women, and body mass index was unrelated to cortisol.
CONCLUSIONS: The cortisol response to waking is a dynamic indicator of HPA
function that has previously been related to chronic psychological stress. These 
results confirm a recent Swedish study, and indicate that cortisol responses to
waking may be indicative of neuroendocrine disturbance in central obesity.


PMID: 15211363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Psychosom Med. 2004 Jul-Aug;66(4):492-500.

Exaggerated platelet and hemodynamic reactivity to mental stress in men with
coronary artery disease.

Strike PC, Magid K, Brydon L, Edwards S, McEwan JR, Steptoe A.

Psychobiology Group, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University
College London, London, UK. p.strike@public-health.ucl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: This study compared the effects of acute mental stress on
cardiovascular and subjective responses and platelet activation in male patients 
with established coronary artery disease (CAD) and age-matched controls.
METHODS: We assessed 17 male CAD patients aged 44 to 59 years and 22 healthy male
controls. Blood pressure, heart rate, and hemodynamics were assessed before,
during, and up to 2 hours after administration of color/word and mirror tracing
tasks. Blood was sampled at baseline, after tasks, and at 30 and 75 minutes after
stress, and platelet activation was assessed by measuring platelet-leukocyte
aggregates (PLAs) using flow cytometry.
RESULTS: CAD patients showed significantly greater systolic blood pressure stress
responses than controls (mean increases of 43.9 and 28.3 mm Hg, adjusted for
income, body mass index, waist/hip ratio, and medication), together with larger
increases in heart rate (14.1 and 4.7 bpm) and cardiac index. Total peripheral
resistance increased during the poststress recovery period in CAD patients but
not in controls. PLAs increased with stress in both groups, but remained elevated
at 75 minutes in CAD patients, returning to baseline in controls. Heart rate and 
cardiac index responses were correlated with increases in subjective stress and
with depression ratings, whereas PLA responses were associated with ratings of
task difficulty.
CONCLUSION: Acute mental stress stimulated heightened cardiovascular responses in
CAD patients, coupled with more prolonged platelet activation. These factors may 
contribute to plaque rupture and thrombogenesis, and partly mediate
stress-induced triggering of acute coronary syndromes.


PMID: 15272093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Ann Epidemiol. 2004 Apr;14(4):250-7.

Biological predictors of change in functioning in the Whitehall II study.

Kumari M, Seeman T, Marmot M.

International Centre for Health and Society, Department of Epidemiology and
Public Health, University College London, London, UK.
M.Kumari@public-health.ucl.ac.uk

PURPOSE: To examine whether risk factors for CHD are related to change in
functioning independent of the presence or development of disease.
METHODS: Longitudinal follow up of 4768 men and 2034 women civil servants from 20
London-based departments with complete data for the SF-36, biological variables, 
and BMI and health related behaviors. Data are used from two phases of the
Whitehall II study, phase 3 (1991-1993) and phase 4 (1995) with an interval of 36
months. Weight, height, fasting insulin, 2-hour post load glucose, total and
HDL-cholesterol, fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor, diastolic and systolic blood 
pressure, and waist hip ratio were measured at phase 3. Demographic and
socio-economic information, health related behaviors, and the SF-36 were obtained
at both phases by questionnaire.
RESULTS: Waist hip ratio, fasting insulin, triglycerides, and HDL-cholesterol
were associated with a decline in physical functioning in the total cohort and
when those with poor health at baseline were removed from the analyses. Principal
component analysis revealed that these variables clustered with total cholesterol
and may represent insulin resistance. The biological variables had a cumulative
effect on decline in physical functioning such that those with poor waist hip
ratio, fasting insulin, triglycerides, and HDL-cholesterol was two times greater 
than those without. This relationship was independent of exercise, smoking, and
alcohol intake which explained only 17% and 5.4% of the association in men and
women, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: A number of biological variables, which may represent insulin
resistance, are associated with decline in physical functioning in men and women 
independent of prevalent ill health or health related behaviors.


PMID: 15066604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Diabetes Care. 2004 Feb;27(2):530-7.

Risk factors for coronary heart disease in type 1 diabetic patients in Europe:
the EURODIAB Prospective Complications Study.

Soedamah-Muthu SS, Chaturvedi N, Toeller M, Ferriss B, Reboldi P, Michel G, Manes
C, Fuller JH; EURODIAB Prospective Complications Study Group.

Department of Epidemiology and Public-Health, Royal Free and University College
London Medical School, London, UK. sabita@public-health.ucl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: The goal of the study was to examine risk factors in the prediction of
coronary heart disease (CHD) and differences in men and women in the EURODIAB
Prospective Complications Study.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Baseline risk factors and CHD at follow-up were
assessed in 2,329 type 1 diabetic patients without prior CHD. CHD was defined as 
physician-diagnosed myocardial infarction, angina pectoris, coronary artery
bypass graft surgery, and/or Minnesota-coded ischemic electrocardiograms or fatal
CHD.
RESULTS: There were 151 patients who developed CHD, and the 7-year incidence rate
was 8.0 (per 1,000 person-years) in men and 10.2 in women. After adjustment for
age and/or duration of diabetes, the following risk factors were related to CHD
in men: age, GHb, waist-to-hip ratio (WHR), HDL cholesterol, smoking, albumin
excretion rate (AER), and autonomic neuropathy. The following risk factors were
related to CHD in women: age, systolic blood pressure (BP), fasting
triglycerides, AER, and retinopathy. Multivariate standardized Cox proportional
hazards models showed that age (hazard ratio 1.5), AER (1.3 in men and 1.6 in
women), WHR (1.3 in men), smoking (1.5 in men), fasting triglycerides (1.3 in
women) or HDL cholesterol (0.74 in women), and systolic BP (1.3 in women) were
predictors of CHD.
CONCLUSIONS: This study supports the evidence for a strong predictive role of
baseline albuminuria in the pathogenesis of CHD in type 1 diabetes. Furthermore, 
sex-specific risk factors such as systolic BP, fasting triglycerides (or HDL
cholesterol), and WHR were found to be important in the development of CHD.


PMID: 14747240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2004 Feb;28(2):262-8.

Socioeconomic gradient in body size and obesity among women: the role of dietary 
restraint, disinhibition and hunger in the Whitehall II study.

Dykes J, Brunner EJ, Martikainen PT, Wardle J.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Royal Free and University College
London Medical School, London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the associations between three psychological eating
behaviour variables--restraint, hunger and disinhibition--and body weight and
size, and to assess their explanatory power for the employment grade gradients in
body measurement.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional analysis of self-report and clinical data.
SUBJECTS: : In all, 1470 women (aged 45-68 y, mean 56.3, s.d. 6.0 y), body mass
index (BMI) 26.3 (4.8) kg/m(2) at phase 5 (1997-98) of the Whitehall II study.
MEASUREMENTS: Employment grade was measured in six bands ranging from clerical
(lowest) to administrative (highest). Five measures of body size were examined:
BMI, weight in kilograms, waist and hip measurement in centimetres and waist-hip 
ratio. The eating behaviour variables were measured using Stunkard and Messick's 
(1985) Three-Factor Eating Questionnaire (TFEQ).
RESULTS: Disinhibition and hunger scores were strongly and directly associated
with all measures of body weight and size. Restraint score was not directly
associated with body size and weight. An interaction between restraint and
disinhibition scores was found. The low-restraint-high-disinhibition group (based
on median score splits) were the heaviest (BMI 28.5 kg/m(2)) and largest (waist
85.8 cm), while the low-restraint-low-disinhibition group were the lightest (BMI 
24.2 kg/m(2)) and smallest (waist 76.3 cm). Employment grade gradients in body
weight and size remained largely unchanged after adjustment for dietary
restraint. Moderate attenuations were found for disinhibition scores (3.6-15.0%) 
and hunger (4.8-19.9%) on the five body-size measures.
CONCLUSION: Among middle-aged women high scores on hunger and disinhibition, as
measured by the TFEQ, are associated with greater body size. Restraint relates to
body size through its interaction with disinhibition. Individuals with high
disinhibition and any level of restraint are heavier and larger than those with
low levels of disinhibition. High disinhibition coupled with low levels of
restraint is associated with the greatest weight and size. Hunger and
disinhibition explain a moderate amount of the gradient in body size across
employment grade and may be useful concepts for future work on the socio-economic
gradient in obesity and overweight.


PMID: 14647173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2004 Jan;86(1):27-30.

Pain in the well-fixed, aseptic titanium hip replacement. The role of corrosion.

Hallam P, Haddad F, Cobb J.

University College London Hospitals, England, UK.

Comment in
    J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2005 May;87(5):745; author reply 745-6.

We have investigated nine patients with cemented Furlong (JRI, London, UK)
titanium hip replacements who presented with early pain despite a well-fixed,
aseptic prosthesis. All were followed up clinically and radiologically at regular
intervals. Pain was located in the thigh and was worse at night. Radiographs
showed cortical hypertrophy of the femur around the tip of the stem. Eight of the
nine patients subsequently required single-stage revision using an uncemented
prosthesis, which relieved the pain. At revision, the pH of the tip of the stem
was found to be highly acidic with macroscopic evidence of corrosion consisting
of multiple layers of titanium oxides when studied by X-ray dispersive analysis. 
Cemented titanium implants have a potential for crevice corrosion leading to
cortical hypertrophy and intractable pain.


PMID: 14765860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2003 Oct;57(10):1250-3.

Beer and obesity: a cross-sectional study.

Bobak M, Skodova Z, Marmot M.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, International Centre for Health and
Society, University College London, UK. martinb@public-health.ucl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: There is a common notion that beer drinkers are, on average, more
'obese' than either nondrinkers or drinkers of wine or spirits. This is
reflected, for example, by the expression 'beer belly'. However, the few studies 
on the association between consumption of beer and abdominal obesity produced
inconsistent results. We examined the relation between beer intake and waist-hip 
ratio (WHR) and body mass index (BMI) in a beer-drinking population.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional study.
SETTINGS: General population of six districts of the Czech Republic.
SUBJECTS: A random sample of 1141 men and 1212 women aged 25-64 y (response rate 
76%) completed a questionnaire and underwent a short examination in a clinic.
Intake of beer, wine and spirits during a typical week, frequency of drinking,
and a number of other factors were measured by a questionnaire. The present
analyses are based on 891 men and 1098 women who where either nondrinkers or
'exclusive' beer drinkers (ie they did not drink any wine or spirits in a typical
week).
RESULTS: The mean weekly beer intake was 3.1 l in men and 0.3 l in women. In men,
beer intake was positively related to WHR in age-adjusted analyses, but the
association was attenuated and became nonsignificant after controlling for other 
risk factors. There appeared to be an interaction with smoking: the relation
between beer intake and WHR was seen only among nonsmokers. Beer intake was not
related to BMI in men. In women, beer intake was not related to WHR, but there
was a weak inverse association with BMI.
CONCLUSION: It is unlikely that beer intake is associated with a largely
increased WHR or BMI.


PMID: 14506485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2003 Oct;57(10):816-22.

Central and total obesity in middle aged men and women in relation to lifetime
socioeconomic status: evidence from a national birth cohort.

Langenberg C, Hardy R, Kuh D, Brunner E, Wadsworth M.

MRC National Survey of Health and Development, Department of Epidemiology and
Public Health, University College London, 1-19 Torrington Place, London WC1E 6BT,
UK. c.langenberg@ucl.ac.uk

STUDY OBJECTIVE: To investigate the influence of social class in childhood, young
adulthood and middle age, and intergenerational mobility, on adult central and
total obesity.
DESIGN: Prospective, population based, birth cohort study. Participants and
Setting: 1472 men and 1563 women born in 1946 in England, Scotland, and Wales.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Waist-hip ratio, waist-height ratio, waist circumference, and
body mass index at age 53 years. Main results: Father's social class at
participant's age 4 years was inversely associated with adult central and total
obesity at age 53 years in men and women. For example, the mean difference of
waist-hip ratio (95% confidence intervals) between father's professional social
class I and unskilled manual social class V was 2.6% (0.7 to 4.6) for men and
2.5% (0.5 to 4.4) for women. The effect of father's social class remained after
adjustment for participant's own social class in young adulthood and middle age. 
Both adult social classes were inversely related to obesity among women, but not 
men, after adjustment for childhood circumstances. Upwardly mobile men and women 
were less obese than participants remaining in their father's social class and
their levels of obesity tended to be between the class they left and the class
they joined.
CONCLUSIONS: The effect of social class on adult obesity differed according to
the stage in the life course at which social class was measured, and gender.
Childhood circumstances had enduring influences on adult obesity, although our
results on intergenerational mobility indicate potential reversibility of early
life disadvantage.


PMCID: PMC1732299
PMID: 14573589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Curr Osteoporos Rep. 2003 Sep;1(2):66-70.

Burden of osteoporosis and fractures.

Keen RW.

Department of Medicine, Centre for Rheumatology, Royal Free and University
College of London Medical School, University College London, Arthur Stanley
House, Tottenham Street, London W1T 4NT, UK. richard.keen@ucl.ac.uk

Osteoporosis currently affects up to one in three women and one in 12 men. In
1990, there were 1.6 million hip fractures per annum worldwide and this number is
estimated to reach 6 million by 2050. This increase in the number of fractures is
due to an increase in the number of elderly people in the population, improved
survival, and an increase in the age-specific fracture rates of unknown etiology.
The rising number of osteoporotic fractures and their associated morbidity will
place a heavy burden on future health care resources. In the United States, the
cost for the management of osteoporosis has been estimated at $17 billion. The
majority of this cost is spent on the acute surgical and medical management
following hip fracture, and the subsequent rehabilitation. Currently, only
minimal costs are utilized for treatment and prevention of osteoporosis.
Hopefully, however, an accurate assessment of the burden of osteoporosis on the
individual and the health care system will enable the targeting of resources to
tackle this growing problem. With an increasing number of effective
pharmaceutical interventions, it is critical that these agents are targeted to
those at greatest risk for future fracture. This will ultimately reduce the
burden of osteoporosis in future years.


PMID: 16036067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Brain Behav Immun. 2003 Aug;17(4):286-95.

Socioeconomic status, C-reactive protein, immune factors, and responses to acute 
mental stress.

Owen N, Poulton T, Hay FC, Mohamed-Ali V, Steptoe A.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, 1-19
Torrington Place, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

Low socioeconomic status (SES) is associated with increased risk of coronary
heart disease and immune-related disorders. We hypothesised that SES would be
inversely associated with the acute phase reactant C-reactive protein (CRP) and
with circulating lymphocyte levels, and that lymphocyte responses to acute
psychological stress would also vary with SES. CRP was obtained from 226, and
lymphocyte counts from 127 healthy volunteers from the Whitehall II cohort, and
SES was defined primarily by grade of employment. CRP concentration was greater
in lower compared with higher SES participants (1.18+/-0.75 vs. 0.75+/-0.8
mg/l,p=.002) independently of sex, age, body mass, waist/hip ratio, smoking,
alcohol, and season of the year. Similar differences were evident when SES was
defined by income and educational attainment. Higher SES was also associated with
lower total lymphocyte (p=.023), T-lymphocyte (p=.024) and natural killer (NK)
cell counts (p=.006). Total, T- and B-lymphocyte, and NK cell counts increased
with stress, but immune stress reactivity did not vary with SES. Post-stress
recovery was delayed in women compared with men. The results suggest that
moderate inflammation and immune activation may be processes through which lower 
SES increases disease risk.


PMID: 12831831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Int J Epidemiol. 2003 Aug;32(4):600-6.

Association of the metabolic syndrome with both vigorous and moderate physical
activity.

Rennie KL, McCarthy N, Yazdgerdi S, Marmot M, Brunner E.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, 1-19
Torrington Place, London WC1E 6BT, UK. kirsten.rennie@mrc-hnr.cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Cross-sectional relationships between moderate and vigorous physical 
activity and the metabolic syndrome (MS) were examined in the Whitehall II study 
of civil servants (age 45-68 years). We assessed cardiovascular fitness and body 
mass index (BMI) as possible mediators of the observed association.
METHODS: Measures of 2-hour glucose, systolic blood pressure, fasting
triglycerides, waist-hip ratio, and high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol
were obtained in 5153 white European participants. Participants in the most
adverse sex-specific quintile for three or more of these risk factors were
classified as having MS. Self-reported leisure-time physical activity was
categorized into separate moderate and vigorous activity classes. BMI and resting
heart rate (HR) were used to estimate body fatness and cardiovascular fitness
respectively.
RESULTS: The odds ratios (95% CI) for having the metabolic syndrome in the top
categories of vigorous and moderate activity were 0.52 (95% CI: 0.40, 0.67) and
0.78 (95% CI: 0.63, 0.96) respectively, adjusted for age, sex, smoking, alcohol
intake, socioeconomic status, and other activity. Adjustment for BMI and resting 
HR substantially attenuated both of the above associations.
CONCLUSIONS: Moderate and vigorous physical leisure-time activity are each
associated with reduced risk of being classified with MS independently of age,
smoking, and high alcohol intake. Both vigorous and moderate activities may be
beneficial to the MS cluster of risk factors among middle-aged populations.
Reduced BMI and increased cardiovascular fitness may be important mediators of
this association for both intensities of activity.


PMID: 12913036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Health Psychol. 2003 Jul;22(4):398-405.

Psychosocial and socioeconomic factors associated with glycated hemoglobin in
nondiabetic middle-aged men and women.

Feldman PJ, Steptoe A.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, United
Kingdom.

The authors tested associations between glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c; an index of
glucose homeostasis and an indicator of cardiovascular disease risk in
nondiabetic populations) and socioeconomic status (defined by grade of
employment) and psychosocial factors in 234 British civil servants. HbA1c
concentration was inversely related to grade of employment. Higher HbA1c was
associated with greater waist-hip ratio, lower control at work, lower internal
locus of control, lower active coping, and lower social support. Control at work,
internal and chance locus of control, and active coping were also related to
socioeconomic status. The association of social support but not other
psychosocial factors with HbA1c was independent of socioeconomic status. HbA1c
may complement measures of the metabolic syndrome and insulin resistance in
studies of psychosocial factors in cardiovascular disease risk.


PMID: 12940396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Oral Oncol. 2003 Feb;39(2):190-4.

Metastasising clear cell odontogenic carcinoma: a case report and review of the
literature.

Kumar M, Fasanmade A, Barrett AW, Mack G, Newman L, Hyde NC.

Maxillofacial Unit, University College London Hospitals NHS Trust, London WC1E
6AU, UK. deepimahesh@hotmail.com

Primary odontogenic carcinomas are rare and examples which have metastasised are 
even more uncommon. We describe the first reported case of a clear cell
odontogenic carcinoma which metastasised to distant bones, namely the 5th lumbar 
vertebra and hip, 3 years after initial diagnosis. The initial incisional biopsy 
was thought to represent a calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumour, but in the
subsequent resection the tumour showed a prominent clear cell component admixed
with squamous cells showing peripheral palisading, widespread infiltration and
necrosis indicating a malignant neoplasm. Radiologically guided biopsy revealed a
metastatic lesion in L5 vertebrae and left hip, confirmed by
immunohistochemistry. The metastatic lesion had similar appearances to the first 
biopsy, and diagnosis was confirmed by comparison of histological features,
immunohistochemistry and exclusion of a second primary lesion by clinical
examination and imaging. The diagnosis of clear cell odontogenic carcinoma is a
difficult one to make. The behaviour of these tumours is unpredictable. This case
confirms that clear cell odontogenic carcinomas have the potential for distant
metastasis and require long-term follow up.


PMID: 12509974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Pain. 2002 Nov;100(1-2):35-46.

Abdominal sensitivity in the first year of life: comparison of infants with and
without prenatally diagnosed unilateral hydronephrosis.

Andrews KA, Desai D, Dhillon HK, Wilcox DT, Fitzgerald M.

Children Nationwide Paediatric Pain Research Centre, Department of Anatomy,
University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
k.andrews@ich.ucl.ac.uk

There are few studies on visceral pain in infants, despite its clinical
importance. We have used the abdominal skin reflex (ASR) to measure changes in
abdominal sensitivity in the presence of visceral pathology in infants. The
reflex was elicited by applying calibrated von Frey hairs to each side of the
abdomen and the mechanical threshold and the degree of reflex radiation as
denoted by hip flexion were measured. The developmental progression of ASR
properties during the first year of life was studied in a cross-sectional sample 
of healthy infants ranging from 30 to 95 weeks postconceptional age (PCA). These 
properties were compared to those in infants with unilateral hydronephrosis (UH) 
using a blinded protocol. Infants with UH were studied at their first outpatient 
appointment after birth, and postoperatively following surgery if this was
indicated. The investigators were blinded to laterality and severity of
hydronephrosis until data were analysed, or until surgery. A total of 30 patients
with UH and 77 healthy infants were included in the study. In 21 (70%) patients, 
the side of hydronephrosis had a significantly lower ASR threshold than the
contralateral side of the abdomen. There was a significant increase in reflex
threshold and decrease in reflex radiation with increasing PCA in control
infants. However, in UH infants, this relationship did not exist, even on the
unaffected side of the abdomen.Our results show that infants with prenatally
diagnosed UH demonstrate increased abdominal sensitivity compared with control
infants. Using the ASR, we have provided the first evidence of referred visceral 
hypersensitivity in infants.


PMID: 12435457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Lancet. 2002 Jul 20;360(9328):219-23.

Association between mitochondrial dysfunction and severity and outcome of septic 
shock.

Brealey D, Brand M, Hargreaves I, Heales S, Land J, Smolenski R, Davies NA,
Cooper CE, Singer M.

Bloomsbury Institute of Intensive Care Medicine, Wolfson Institute of Biomedical 
Research and Department of Medicine, University College London, London W1T 3AA,
UK.

BACKGROUND: Sepsis-induced multiple organ failure is the major cause of mortality
and morbidity in critically ill patients. However, the precise mechanisms by
which this dysfunction is caused remain to be elucidated. We and others have
shown raised tissue oxygen tensions in septic animals and human beings,
suggesting reduced ability of the organs to use oxygen. Because ATP production by
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation accounts for more than 90% of total
oxygen consumption, we postulated that mitochondrial dysfunction results in organ
failure, possibly due to nitric oxide, which is known to inhibit mitochondrial
respiration in vitro and is produced in excess in sepsis.
METHODS: We did skeletal muscle biopsies on 28 critically ill septic patients
within 24 h of admission to intensive care, and on nine control patients
undergoing elective hip surgery. The biopsy samples were analysed for
respiratory-chain activity (complexes I-IV), ATP concentration, reduced
glutathione (an intracellular antioxidant) concentration, and nitrite/nitrate
concentrations (a marker of nitric oxide production).
FINDINGS: Skeletal muscle ATP concentrations were significantly lower in the 12
patients with sepsis who subsequently died than in the 16 septic patients who
survived (p=0.0003) and in controls (p=0.05). Complex I activity had a
significant inverse correlation with norepinephrine requirements (a proxy for
shock severity, p=0.0003) and nitrite/nitrate concentrations (p=0.0004), and a
significant positive correlation with concentrations of reduced glutathione
(p=0.006) and ATP (p=0.03).
INTERPRETATION: In septic patients, we found an association between nitric oxide 
overproduction, antioxidant depletion, mitochondrial dysfunction, and decreased
ATP concentrations that relate to organ failure and eventual outcome. These data 
implicate bioenergetic failure as an important pathophysiological mechanism
underlying multiorgan dysfunction.


PMID: 12133657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Haemophilia. 2002 Mar;8(2):145-8.

Successful use of recombinant factor VIIa in a patient with inhibitor secondary
to severe factor XI deficiency.

Lawler P, White B, Pye S, Hermans C, Riddell A, Costello C, Brown S, Lee CA.

Haemophilia Centre and Haemostasis Unit and Department of Haematology, Royal Free
University College London Medical School, UK.

Factor XI (FXI) inhibitors are a rare complication of inherited FXI deficiency.
We report the successful use of recombinant factor VIIa (FVIIa) in a patient with
a high-responding inhibitor undergoing cataract extraction. At the time of
surgery there were limited available data on the optimal management of patients
with FXI deficiency. A 62-year-old Ashkenazi Jewish woman had a lifelong history 
of excessive bleeding secondary to severe FXI deficiency (2 U dL-1), and received
FXI concentrate (FXI:C) when she underwent a colposuspension procedure. She was
subsequently diagnosed with a FXI inhibitor of 16 Bethesda units (BU) when she
developed a poor response to FXI:C at the time of total hip replacement. Two
months later she was admitted for cataract extraction. The FXI level was < 1 U
dL-1 with an inhibitor titre of 48 BU. She received 90 microg kg-1 of FVIIa
immediately preoperatively followed by continuous infusion at a rate of 20 microg
kg-1 h-1 for 24 h. The cataract extraction was successful and there was no excess
bleeding during surgery or in the postoperative period. Mutation analysis of the 
FXI gene showed that the patient was homozygous for the type II genotype [exon 5,
Glu117-->Ter]. The reason for the low prevalence of inhibitor formation in
patients with FXI deficiency is unclear but may reflect a number of factors
including reporting bias, the rarity of absent circulating FXI:C activity, and
the infrequent use of FXI replacement therapy.


PMID: 11952851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Public Health Med. 2002 Mar;24(1):21-6.

Variation in coronary artery bypass grafting, angioplasty, cataract surgery, and 
hip replacement rates among primary care groups in London: association with
population and practice characteristics.

Majeed A, Eliahoo J, Bardsley M, Morgan D, Bindman AB.

School of Public Policy, University College London. azeem.majeed@ons.gov.uk

BACKGROUND: Operation rates for common surgical procedures are known to vary
widely both between areas within the same country and between countries. However,
no studies in the United Kingdom have yet examined the variation in the use of
important groups of surgical procedures among primary care groups.
METHODS: Data were obtained from the NHS Executive and the Department of Health
on each of the 66 primary care groups in London that existed on 1 April 1999.
These were used to estimate indicators for six main groups of variables:
population estimates, mortality rates, Census data, benefits data, practice
characteristics, and hospital admissions. The data were used to generate a number
of population and practice variables describing the characteristics of each
primary care group in London. We also obtained information at ward level by age
and sex on the number of patients admitted for coronary artery bypass grafting
(CABG) and angioplasty (PTCA); cataract surgery; and hip replacement in patients 
aged 65 years and over during the period 1997-1998. These data were used with
population estimates to estimate directly age-standardized annual operation rates
for each primary care group for the study period.
RESULTS: Operation rates for the three groups of procedures examined in this
study varied widely between the 66 primary care groups. The directly standardized
combined CABG and PtCA rate varied from 28 to 193 per 100,000 (mean 80); cataract
surgery rates from 167 to 618 per 100,000 (mean 291); and hip replacement in
people aged 65 years and over from 74 to 363 per 100,000 (mean 202). Correlations
between operation rates and population and practice variables were relatively
weak. Multifactorial models explained 57 per cent of the variation in CABG and
PTCA rates, 34 per cent of the variation in cataract surgery rates, and 27 per
cent of the variation in hip replacement rates.
CONCLUSIONS: There are wide variations in the operation rates for important
groups of surgical procedures among primary care groups. These variations are
poorly explained by differences in the population and practice characteristics of
primary care groups. The underlying reasons for variations in operation rates
need to be better understood if the ambitious targets for access to elective
surgery outlined in the NHS plan are to be met.


PMID: 11939378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2001 Sep;43(9):586-600.

Hip dysplasia in bilateral cerebral palsy: incidence and natural history in
children aged 18 months to 5 years.

Scrutton D, Baird G, Smeeton N.

Institute of Child Health, University College London, UK.

Children with bilateral cerebral palsy (CP) born during 1989 to 1992 (n=346) to a
geographically defined population were ascertained and followed up to age 5
years. The aims of the study were to monitor hip development by serial X-rays; to
record gross locomotor development, aspects of physical management, and any
hip-related orthotics or surgery; to learn more of the natural history of hip
development in this condition; and to provide guidelines for a surveillance
protocol for those clinically managing children with bilateral CP. Children were 
X-rayed at 18, 24, 30, 48, and 60 months. X-rays were taken in a standardized
position and measured to record migration percentage, acetabular index, Sharp's
angle, and Smith's diaphyseal ratios. Relationships between the measures were
investigated and a natural history of the children's hip development suggested.
At as early as 18 months, migration percentages were significantly greater than
in the normally developing population, although no measured CP factor could be
identified to be the cause of this early change. Two possible factors affecting
early hip development are described, neither of which is clinically apparent: the
first separates the bilateral CP population as a whole from the normal
population; but there is an additional presdisposing factor affecting some
children only which in the presence of the motor disorder, has a significant
influence on early hip development and subsequent dysplasia. The study confirms
that, when measured correctly, migration percentage is the best guide to hip
surveillance and the need for treatment. It is suggested that all children with
bilateral CP should be X-rayed in a standardized position at 30 months (corrected
for gestational age).


PMID: 11570627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Int J Epidemiol. 2001 Aug;30(4):833-8.

Socioeconomic differences in behavioural and biological risk factors: a
comparison of a Japanese and an English cohort of employed men.

Martikainen P, Ishizaki M, Marmot MG, Nakagawa H, Kagamimori S.

International Centre for Health and Society, Department of Epidemiology and
Public Health, University College London Medical School, 1-19 Torrington Place,
London WC1E 6BT, UK. pekka@public-health.ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: To compare socioeconomic differences in behavioural and biological
risk factors in Japanese and English 39-59-year-old employed men.
METHODS: We measured systolic and diastolic blood pressure, total and high
density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, body mass index (BMI), waist-to-hip ratio 
and fibrinogen at medical screenings and smoking and alcohol consumption in
health questionnaires among Japanese non-manual and manual employees of a steel
products company and among English non-manual employees working in Civil Service 
departments.
RESULTS: In England, higher employment grades were advantaged with regard to most
risk factors studied. In Japan the picture was different in that higher grades
had higher BMI, waist-to-hip-ratio and lower HDL cholesterol. In Japan employment
grade differences in these three risk factors are clearly larger among younger
men than among older men, while in England age differentials in the grade
differences are small. Similar results were obtained for education.
CONCLUSIONS: Important differences in the social patterning of risk factors were 
observed in our cohorts of employed Japanese and English men. The contribution
that these risk factors make in explaining social differences in health may vary 
accordingly. Studies that identify the common and unique determinants of
socioeconomic health differences in different populations are needed.


PMID: 11511613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Kidney Int. 2001 Jul;60(1):219-27.

Microalbuminuria in type 1 diabetes: rates, risk factors and glycemic threshold.

Chaturvedi N, Bandinelli S, Mangili R, Penno G, Rottiers RE, Fuller JH.

EURODIAB, University College London, London, England, United Kingdom.
n.chaturvedi@ic.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The occurrence of microalbuminuria in type 1 diabetes is strongly
predictive of renal and cardiovascular disease and is still likely to occur
despite improvements in glycemic control. A better understanding of
microalbuminuria is required to inform new interventions. We determined the
incidence and risk factors for microalbuminuria [albumin excretion rate (AER) 20 
to 200 microg/min] in the EURODIAB Prospective Complications Study.
METHODS: This is a seven-year follow-up (between 1988 and 1991) of 1134
normoalbuminuric men and women (aged 15 to 60) with type 1 diabetes from 31
European centers. Risk factors and AER were measured centrally.
RESULTS: The incidence of microalbuminuria was 12.6% over 7.3 years. Independent 
baseline risk factors were HbA1c (7.1 vs. 6.2%, P = 0.0001) and AER (9.6 vs. 7.8 
microg/min, P = 0.0001) and, independent of these, fasting triglyceride (0.99 vs.
0.88 mmol/L, P = 0.01), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (3.5 vs. 3.2 mmol/L, 
P = 0.02), body mass index (24.0 vs. 23.4 kg/m2, P = 0.01), and waist to hip
ratio (WHR; 0.85 vs. 0.83, P = 0.009). Triglyceride and WHR risk factors were
nearly as strong as AER in predicting microalbuminuria (standardized regression
effects of 1.3 for triglyceride and WHR and 1.5 for AER). Blood pressure at
follow-up, but not at baseline, was also raised in those who progressed. There
was no evidence of a threshold of HbA1c on microalbuminuria risk.
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of microalbuminuria in patients with type 1 diabetes
remains high, and there is no apparent glycemic threshold for it. Markers of
insulin resistance, such as triglyceride and WHR, are strong risk factors.
Systemic blood pressure is not raised prior to the onset of microalbuminuria.


PMID: 11422754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 May;86(5):2200-4.

Angiotensin-I converting enzyme genotype-dependent benefit from hormone
replacement therapy in isometric muscle strength and bone mineral density.

Woods D, Onambele G, Woledge R, Skelton D, Bruce S, Humphries SE, Montgomery H.

Department of Cardiovascular Genetics, Rayne Institute, University College
London, London WC1E 6JJ, United Kingdom.

Low bone mineral density (BMD) and muscle weakness are major risk factors for
postmenopausal osteoporotic fracture. Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) reverses 
the menopausal decline in maximum voluntary force of the adductor pollicis and
reduces serum angiotensin-I converting enzyme (ACE) levels. The insertion (I)
allele of the ACE gene polymorphism is associated with lower ACE activity and
improved muscle efficiency in response to physical training. Therefore, we
examined whether the presence of the I allele in postmenopausal women would
affect the muscle response to HRT. Those taking HRT showed a significant gain in 
normalized muscle maximum voluntary force slope, the rate of which was strongly
influenced by ACE genotype (16.0 +/- 1.53%, 14.3 +/- 2.67%, and 7.76 +/- 4.13%,
mean +/- SEM for II, ID, and DD genotype, respectively; P = 0.017 for gene
effect, P = 0.004 for I allele effect). There was also a significant ACE gene
effect in the response of BMD to HRT in Ward's triangle (P = 0.03) and a
significant I allele effect in the spine (P = 0.03), but not in the neck of femur
or total hip. These data suggests that low ACE activity associated with the I
allele confers an improved muscle and BMD response in postmenopausal women
treated with HRT.


PMID: 11344227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Diabetes Care. 2001 Feb;24(2):284-9.

Markers of insulin resistance are strong risk factors for retinopathy incidence
in type 1 diabetes.

Chaturvedi N, Sjoelie AK, Porta M, Aldington SJ, Fuller JH, Songini M, Kohner EM;
EURODIAB Prospective Complications Study.

EURODIAB Prospective Complications Study, University College London, UK.
n.chaturvedi@ic.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: To determine the incidence of retinopathy and the relative importance 
of its risk factors in type 1 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: This is a 7.3-year follow-up of 764 of 1,215 (63%)
people with type 1 diabetes across Europe, aged 15-60 years at baseline with no
retinopathy (the EURODIAB Prospective Complications Study). Retinal photographs
were taken at baseline and follow-up and risk factors were assessed to a standard
protocol.
RESULTS: Retinopathy incidence was 56% (429/764, 95% CI 52-59%). Key risk factors
included diabetes duration and glycemic control. We found no evidence of a
threshold effect for HbA1c on retinopathy incidence. Univariate associations were
observed between incidence and albumin excretion rate, cholesterol, triglyceride,
fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor, gamma-glutamyltransferase, waist-to-hip ratio,
and insulin dose. No associations were observed for blood pressure,
cardiovascular disease, or smoking. Independent risk factors, as assessed by
standardized regression effects, were HbA1C (1.93, P = 0.0001), duration (1.32, P
= 0.008), waist-to-hip ratio (1.32, P = 0.01), and fasting triglyceride (1.24, P 
= 0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: Retinopathy incidence in type 1 diabetes remains high. Key risk
factors include diabetes duration and glycemic control, with no evidence of a
threshold for the latter. Other independent risk factors, such as waist-to-hip
ratio and triglyceride levels, both markers of insulin resistance, were strongly 
related to incidence.


PMID: 11213880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Instr Course Lect. 2001;50:253-61.

Osteotomies around the hip: radiographic planning and postoperative evaluation.

Haddad FS, Garbuz DS, Duncan CP.

University College London Hospitals, Department of Orthopaedics, London, United
Kingdom.

The management of the dysplastic hip represents a clinical and a technical
challenge. There is a great deal of variation in the degree and direction of
acetabular dysplasia, and the accurate determination of femoral head coverage is 
difficult. It is, therefore, important to measure and plan any osteotomy based on
each patient's unique acetabular anatomy. A clear understanding of the underlying
anatomic abnormalities is vital so that reconstruction can be appropriately
planned. This understanding is facilitated by an appreciation of the imaging
techniques available and their correct application. The initial imaging of the
dysplastic hip is based on plain radiographs. These determine the diagnosis of
dysplasia and give a good indication of its severity and of the degree of
congruency, instability, and degenerative change. A number of indices have been
defined on these radiographs to facilitate surgical planning and to evaluate
surgical outcomes. Moreover, plain radiographs or fluoroscopy are usually the
only modalities accessible during surgery. More complex imaging is necessary to
define any associated lesions and to quantify the acetabular deficiency more
accurately. Multiplanar imaging using CT scans and computer reconstructions
reduces the need for complex spatial interpretation, facilitates preoperative
planning, and allows preoperative simulation. The availability of more powerful
computers has extended the use of these techniques to intraoperative surgical
navigation. Continued progress and development of imaging techniques will further
determine the type and degree of correction required for each hip and will help
to stratify dysplastic hips for outcomes assessment. Ultimately, it will help
orthopaedic surgeons to evaluate whether the success or failure of osteotomies
around the hip are intrinsic to the techniques used or to the primary disease
process or are related to the surgeon's failure to create a more normal
biomechanical environment for the hip.


PMID: 11372322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2000 Dec;24(12):1726-37.

Evaluation of a modified cognitive-behavioural programme for weight management.

Rapoport L, Clark M, Wardle J.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate a modified cognitive-behavioural treatment (M-CBT) for
weight management which addresses both the psychosocial costs and the
physiological health risks of obesity, without a focus on weight loss.
DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial comparing M-CBT with standard
cognitive-behavioural therapy (S-CBT).
SUBJECTS: Sixty-three overweight women with body mass index (BMI) > or = 28
kg/m2, mean age = 47.5 and mean BMI = 35.4.
MEASURES: Weight, waist and hip circumference, blood lipids, blood glucose, blood
pressure, psychological well-being, depression, self esteem, stress, binge
eating, eating style, body image, nutrient intake, aerobic fitness, activity
levels, patient satisfaction with treatment.
RESULTS: Both M-CBT and S-CBT achieved improvements in a broad range of physical,
psychological and behavioural variables. Weight loss in the S-CBT group was
greater than in the M-CBT group immediately after treatment, but both groups lost
weight. Participants in the M-CBT group continued to lose weight up to the 1 y
follow-up. M-CBT was evaluated positively by participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Both M-CBT and S-CBT programmes were successful at inducing modest
weight loss, as well as improving emotional well-being, reducing distress,
increasing activity and fitness, improving dietary quality and reducing
cardio-vascular disease risk factors. The improvements were maintained or
continued at 1 y follow-up. These results suggest that treatment based on the new
weight-control paradigm which emphasizes sustained lifestyle change without
emphasis on dieting, can produce modest benefits to health and well-being.


PMID: 11126231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2000 Nov;54(11):806-14.

Social distribution of cardiovascular disease risk factors: change among men in
England 1984-1993.

Bartley M, Fitzpatrick R, Firth D, Marmot M.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London WC1E 6BT,
UK. mel@public-health.ucl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: To investigate change in the social distribution of some of the main
risk factors for cardiovascular disease in men in England during a period when
inequality in cardiovascular disease mortality widened
DESIGN: Age standardised comparison of the social distribution of seven known
risk factors for cardiovascular disease (body mass index, waist to hip ratio,
systolic and diastolic blood pressure, consumption of fresh green vegetables,
leisure time exercise, cigarette smoking and levels of social support) in two
large cross sectional representative samples of the English population.
SUBJECTS: Men aged 20-64 years in the 1984 Health and Lifestyle Survey (excluding
Scotland and Wales) first sweep and the 1993 Health Survey for England.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Mean values of continuous variables; age adjusted
proportions of categorical variables; change in the relative index of inequality 
for each risk factor.
RESULTS: The overall prevalence of cardiovascular disease risk factors improved
during the period in which cardiovascular disease mortality was falling. The
social distribution of cardiovascular disease risk factors, in contrast, did not 
become more extreme. Increases in the relative index of inequality for angina
from 1.75 to 1.86, for eating vegetables less than once a day from 1.76 in 1984
to 1.96 in 1993, and an apparently larger increase in inequality of social
support, from 1.92 to 2.53 were not statistically significant. In most cases the 
degree of inequality in risk factors tended to narrow non-significantly: for
example the relative index of inequality fell from 5.02 in 1984 to 3.07 in 1993
for systolic blood pressure, from 5.60 to 4.29 for current smoking and from 6.24 
to 4.19 for eating other than wholemeal bread as the main form of bread in the
diet. The two statistically significant changes in inequality were in the
direction of narrowing inequality: from a relative index of inequality of 2.12 to
0.90 for diastolic blood pressure (p<0.01) and from 19.3 to 0.87 (p<0.01) for
psychological distress as indicated by the General Health Questionnaire.
CONCLUSIONS: Healthier lifestyle options have not been adopted at a significantly
faster rate by middle class than working class people over this time period. At
the population level the change in risk factors is consistent with falling
cardiovascular mortality. The change in the social distribution of risk factors
within the population, however, shows little or no relation to the pattern of
widening inequality in cardiovascular mortality. This may be because the effect
is lagged, or because the adoption of healthier behaviour confers greater
benefits on those in higher socioeconomic status groups.


PMCID: PMC1731575
PMID: 11027193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Atherosclerosis. 2000 Aug;151(2):415-21.

The relationship between employment grade and plasma fibrinogen level among
Japanese male employees. YKKJ Research Group.

Ishizaki M, Martikainen P, Nakagawa H, Marmot M.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, International Centre for Health and
Society, University College London Medical School, UK.
masao@public-health.ucl.ac.uk

Plasma fibrinogen is an important risk factor for cardiovascular disease, and is 
associated with socioeconomic status in Europe and the United States. We
evaluated whether the relationship between socioeconomic status and plasma
fibrinogen level exists in Japanese male employees, and whether this relationship
is independent of other correlates of plasma fibrinogen. This cross-sectional
study was conducted on full-time male employees aged 20-58 in a metal-products
factory between April 1996 and March 1997. Altogether 4375 employees (92.9%)
participated. Low employment grade and low educational background were associated
with increased age-adjusted plasma fibrinogen level. Adjusting for body mass
index, waist to hip ratio, height, smoking habit, alcohol consumption, physical
activity at leisure and systolic blood pressure did not attenuate these
associations much. Adjusting for white blood cell count and hemoglobin Alc
reduced the associations of both employment grade and educational background with
plasma fibrinogen level, nevertheless these relationships remained significant.


PMID: 10924718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2000 May;52(5):595-600.

Cardiovascular disease in women with polycystic ovary syndrome at long-term
follow-up: a retrospective cohort study.

Wild S, Pierpoint T, McKeigue P, Jacobs H.

Epidemiology Unit, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine; Cobbold
Laboratories, Department of Medicine, University College London Medical School,
The Middlesex Hospital, London, UK. sarahwild@doctors.org.uk

OBJECTIVE: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is associated with higher prevalence 
of cardiovascular risk factors but the relative prevalence of cardiovascular
disease in women with PCOS has not previously been reported. We have compared
cardiovascular mortality and morbidity in middle-aged women previously diagnosed 
with PCOS and age-matched control women.
DESIGN: A retrospective cohort study of women diagnosed with PCOS in the United
Kingdom before 1979.
PATIENTS: Seventy cohort members died before 31 March 1999. Morbidity data were
collected from 319 women with PCOS and 1060 age-matched control women. Sixty-one 
women with PCOS and 63 control women attended a clinical examination.
MEASUREMENTS: Data were collected from death certificates, general practitioners'
records and questionnaires with measurement of cardiovascular risk factors in a
subsample of questionnaire respondents.
RESULTS: All-cause and cardiovascular mortality in the cohort were similar to
women in the general population (standardized mortality ratios (95% CI): 93
(72-117) and 78 (45-124), respectively). Women with PCOS had higher levels of
several cardiovascular risk factors: diabetes (P = 0.002) hypertension (P =
0.04), hypercholesterolaemia (P < 0.001), hypertriglyceridaemia (P = 0.02) and
increased waist:hip ratio (P = 0.004). After adjustment for BMI, odds ratios (OR)
were 2.2 (0.9-5. 2) for diabetes, 1.4 (0.9-2.0) for hypertension and 3.2
(1.7-6.0) for hypercholesterolaemia. A history of coronary heart disease (CHD)
was not significantly more common in women with PCOS (crude OR (95%CI) 1.5
(0.7-2.9)) but the crude OR for cerebrovascular disease was 2.8 (1.1-7.1).
CONCLUSION: At long-term follow-up, a history of nonfatal cerebrovascular disease
and cardiovascular risk factors including diabetes are more prevalent among women
with polycystic ovary syndrome. Morbidity and mortality from of coronary heart
disease among women with polycystic ovary syndrome is not as high as previously
predicted. This finding challenges our understanding of the aetiology of coronary
heart disease in women.


PMID: 10792339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2000 Apr;(373):164-73.

Stability and bone preservation in custom designed revision hip stems.

Walker PS, Culligan SG, Hua J, Muirhead-Allwood SK, Bentley G.

Centre for Biomedical Engineering, University College London, Royal National
Orthopaedic Hospital Trust, United Kingdom.

Three types of uncemented femoral stems were designed for patients having
revision hip surgery, with the goals of promoting axial stability and preserving 
proximal bone stock. These stems were made individually using computer design and
manufacturing technology. Various design features were examined using nonlinear
finite element analysis. All stems had lateral, medial, and anterior flares in
the proximal region, proximal hydroxyapatite coating, and a collar. Based on a
published classification system, the three designs were found suitable for
variously encountered cavitary defects. For cases involving small amounts of bone
destruction, a primary type of stem was used. With severe cases, an extended
polished stem was used. For the worst cases, an extended stem with longitudinal
cutting flutes and complete hydroxyapatite coating was necessary. The axial
migration was measured radiographically for a 2-year period. The migration rates 
were comparable with those seen in cemented primary and in custom primary
hydroxyapatite coated stems. Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry data were obtained 
during a 4-year postoperative period. Average bone density in all regions was
maintained within 12% of the immediate postoperative values. It was concluded
that the proposed system for treating patients needing revision hip surgery
showed desirable properties that were comparable to primary hip replacements.


PMID: 10810474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2000 Mar;(372):192-204.

Prevention of loosening in total hip replacements using guided bone regeneration.

Bhumbra RP, Walker PS, Berman AB, Emmanual J, Barrett DS, Blunn GW.

Centre for Biomedical Engineering, University College London, Royal National
Orthopaedic Hospital Trust, Middlesex, United Kingdom.

The aim of this study was to prevent wear debris from reaching the interface of
the acetabular cup and femoral component by using a partially occlusive expanded 
polytetrafluoroethylene membrane. This membrane initially acted as a physical
seal, which became incorporated by bone and soft tissue, forming a secondary
biologic seal, preventing loosening. An animal model was developed to test the
hypothesis. The model replicated the mechanisms of loosening where the effects of
wear debris were studied. Using femoral heads with the appropriate roughness, a
goat model produced the radiologic and histologic presentation of loosening as
observed in total hip replacements in humans. Loosening was assessed by
measurement of the radiolucent lines, and was attributed to wear debris by
histologic investigation. The expanded polytetrafluoroethylene membrane prevented
acetabular implant loosening to a statistical significance of 0.02 in a blinded
assessment when compared with the control groups. Loosening of the first 5 mm of 
the proximomedial aspect of the femur also was prevented. The authors of the
current study prevented wear particle-induced osteolysis in the acetabular
component by using an expanded polytetrafluoroethylene membrane to seal the
bone-cement interface.


PMID: 10738428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Arthroplasty. 1999 Dec;14(8):945-51.

Design and application of combined hip-knee intramedullary joint replacements.

Walker PS, Yoon WW, Cannon SR, Bentley G, Muirhead-Allwood SK.

Centre for Biomedical Engineering, University College London, Royal National
Orthopaedic Hospital Trust, Stanmore, United Kingdom.

Cases in which there is a total hip arthroplasty and a stemmed total knee
arthroplasty in the same femur, with loosening of 1 or both components, with
serious endosteal bone loss or even a fracture between the stems present a
difficult reconstruction problem. We describe a reconstruction using a combined
hip and stemmed knee, designed so that they could be rigidly connected during the
surgical procedure. The advantages of this implant design are that the entire
femur with its muscle attachments is preserved, and the inherent stability allows
for immediate weight bearing. To determine the viability of the connection
between the hip and the knee, a stress analysis was carried out using finite
element analysis. Guidelines were thus provided for the required metal and cement
thicknesses. Three case examples are presented with an average follow-up of 3
years. It was shown that the combined hip-knee implant could provide successful
results for these difficult reconstructive problems in appropriately selected
cases.


PMID: 10614885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Br J Radiol. 1999 Sep;72(861):864-71.

The effect of region of interest selection on dual energy X-ray absorptiometry
measurements of the calcaneus in 55 post-menopausal women.

Kang C, Speller R.

Department of Medical Physics, University College London, UK.

Bone mineral density (BMD) of the calcaneus was assessed by dual energy X-ray
absorptiometry (DXA) in four different regions of the calcaneus in 20
pre-menopausal and 55 post-menopausal women, none of whom were on treatment or
suffering from conditions affecting bone. The total body option in the small
animal software package of a Lunar DPX-L bone densitometer was used. The
precision of the technique (%CV) varied from 0.7 to 2.2% depending on the region 
scanned. For post-menopausal women, BMD results in the mid and posterior parts of
the calcaneus varied by < 7% while BMD in the anterior region was about 20%
lower. DXA of the calcaneus was compared with measurements at the spine (L2-L4)
and hip (femoral neck) and changes with age were estimated from cross-sectional
data. BMD of the calcaneus was significantly reduced in 28 post-menopausal women 
with low lumbar spine BMD (-2SD) compared with women with normal spine BMD.
Calcaneal BMD was significantly correlated to axial BMD (r = 0.45-0.77) and to
age (r = 0.45 to -0.63). For a subgroup of 33 post-menopausal women measured
twice after approximately 1 year, calcaneus BMD decreased by between 1.2% and
2.5% while axial BMD showed no significant change. Unlike spine or femoral neck
BMD, the decrease in calcaneus BMD was significantly greater in women with low
spine BMD than in normal women, possibly indicating improved detection of
skeletal changes. The optimum measurement sites for BMD in the calcaneus were
within the mid or posterior part of the calcaneus or enclosing the whole
posterior calcaneus. The calcaneus was shown to be a precise, sensitive and
simple measurement site suitable for the assessment of osteoporosis, especially
in the elderly where degenerative changes in the spine and hip can complicate BMD
assessment.


PMID: 10645192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Aug;84(8):2679-85.

A sexually dimorphic pattern of growth hormone secretion in the elderly.

Hindmarsh PC, Dennison E, Pincus SM, Cooper C, Fall CH, Matthews DR, Pringle PJ, 
Brook CG.

London Center for Pediatric Endocrinology, University College London, United
Kingdom. p.hindmarsh@ucl.ac.uk

In rodents, the sexually dimorphic pattern of pulsatile GH secretion is an
important determinant of growth, liver enzyme function and insulin-like growth
factor I (IGF-I) expression. Whether this difference is present in humans at
different ages is unclear. We studied GH secretory patterns in the elderly by
constructing 24-h serum GH profiles in 45 male and 38 female (age, 59.4-73.0 yr) 
volunteers and related patterns to IGF-I, IGF-binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3), and
GH-binding protein levels; body mass index; and waist/hip ratio. Serum GH
concentrations were measured in samples drawn at 20-min intervals and analyzed
using a sensitive chemiluminescent assay (Nichols Institute Diagnostics:
sensitivity, 0.036 mU/L). The 24-h serum GH profiles were analyzed using a
concentration distribution method to determine GH peak and trough levels,
spectral analysis, and assessment of serial irregularity by approximate entropy
(ApEn). There was a highly significant difference in mean 24-h serum GH
concentrations in females compared to males (males, 0.88 mU/L; females, 1.31
mU/L; P = 0.009) as a result of significantly higher trough GH levels (males,
0.04 mU/L; females, 0.16 mU/L; P < 0.001). Peak values were not significantly
different. Serum IGF-I levels were significantly higher in males (males, 162.4
ng/mL; females, 87.8 ng/ mL; P < 0.001). Peak GH values were related to serum
IGF-I levels (males: r = 0.39; P = 0.009; females: r = 0.5; P = 0.002), whereas
trough GH levels were not. IGFBP-3 levels were similar and related to GH peaks
only in males (r = 0.32; P = 0.03). GH was secreted with a dominant periodicity
of 200 min in males and 280 min in females (P < 0.025). The proportion of time
taken up by regular oscillatory activity was less in females (females, 11.1%;
males, 14.7%; P = 0.01). GH secretion assessed by ApEn was more disordered in
females (males, 0.60; females, 0.81; P < 0.001), and increasing disorder was
associated with lower IGF-I levels. Body mass index was negatively related to GH 
in both sexes. In males, trough values were the major determinant (r = -0.31; P =
0.04), whereas in females, the peak value was the major determinant (r = 0.35; P 
= 0.04). Trough GH levels were inversely related in both sexes to waist/hip ratio
(males: r = -0.40; P = 0.006; females: r = -0.44; P = 0.006) and to increasing
secretory disorder (ApEn; r = -0.46; P < 0.001). These data demonstrate a
sexually dimorphic pattern of GH secretion in the elderly.


PMID: 10443659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Neuron. 1999 Aug;23(4):713-24.

Schwann cell-derived Desert hedgehog controls the development of peripheral nerve
sheaths.

Parmantier E, Lynn B, Lawson D, Turmaine M, Namini SS, Chakrabarti L, McMahon AP,
Jessen KR, Mirsky R.

Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Neuron. 1999 Aug;23(4):627-9.

We show that Schwann cell-derived Desert hedgehog (Dhh) signals the formation of 
the connective tissue sheath around peripheral nerves. mRNAs for dhh and its
receptor patched (ptc) are expressed in Schwann cells and perineural mesenchyme, 
respectively. In dhh-/- mice, epineurial collagen is reduced, while the
perineurium is thin and disorganized, has patchy basal lamina, and fails to
express connexin 43. Perineurial tight junctions are abnormal and allow the
passage of proteins and neutrophils. In nerve fibroblasts, Dhh upregulates ptc
and hedgehog-interacting protein (hip). These experiments reveal a novel
developmental signaling pathway between glia and mesenchymal connective tissue
and demonstrate its molecular identity in peripheral nerve. They also show that
Schwann cell-derived signals can act as important regulators of nerve
development.


PMID: 10482238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Med Eng Phys. 1999 May;21(4):259-63.

Measurement of posture by triangulation using potentiometers.

Yu CH, Donaldson NN.

Department of Medical Physics and Bioengineering, University College London, UK.

To measure the posture of a paraplegic while standing up, an economical method
has been developed. Markers, glued over the joints, hook onto strings which run
to rotary potentiometers mounted on a fixed frame. Springs maintain a
near-constant small tension in the strings, and the potentiometers rotate as the 
strings wind onto pulleys. The positions are calculated by triangulation, using
two potentiometers per joint, assuming that body segment lengths are constant, or
three potentiometers without this assumption. Using a second-order polynomial
fit, the random error in length measurement for each potentiometer is less than
+/-2 mm for the string length from 0 mm to 1100 mm, or less than +/-1 mm in
actual range from 600 mm to 1000 mm. With two potentiometers per joint, using a
second-order polynomial fit and assuming the ankle position is known exactly, an 
estimate of the resulting errors in the knee and hip marker positions are 4 and
8.5 mm, respectively.


PMID: 10514044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Epidemiol Community Health. 1999 Apr;53(4):197-203.

Are risk factors for atherothrombotic disease associated with back pain sickness 
absence? The Whitehall II Study.

Hemingway H, Shipley M, Stansfeld S, Shannon H, Frank J, Brunner E, Marmot M.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London Medical
School.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: To explore the previously stated hypothesis that risk factors
for atherothrombotic disease are associated with back pain.
DESIGN: Prospective (mean of four years of follow up) and retrospective analyses 
using two main outcome measures: (a) short (< or = 7 days) and long (> 7 days)
spells of sickness absence because of back pain reported separately in men and
women; (b) consistency of effect across the resulting four duration of spell and 
sex cells.
SETTING: 14 civil service departments in London.
PARTICIPANTS: 3506 male and 1380 female white office-based civil servants, aged
35-55 years at baseline.
MAIN RESULTS: In age adjusted models, low apo AI was associated with back pain
across all four duration-sex cells and smoking was associated across three cells.
Six factors were associated with back pain in two cells: low exercise and high
BMI, waist-hip ratio, triglycerides, insulin and Lp(a). On full adjustment (for
age, BMI, employment grade and back pain at baseline), each of these factors
retained a statistically significant effect in at least one duration-sex cell.
Triglycerides were associated with short and long spells of sickness absence
because of back pain in men in fully adjusted models with rate ratios (95%
confidence intervals) of 1.53 (1.1, 2.1) and 1.75 (1.0, 3.2) respectively. There 
was little or no evidence of association in age adjusted models with: fibrinogen,
glucose tolerance, total cholesterol, apoB, hypertension, factor VII, von
Willebrand factor, electrocardiographic evidence of coronary heart disease and
reported angina.
CONCLUSIONS: In this population of office workers, only modest support was found 
for an atherothrombotic component to back pain sickness absence. However, the
young age of participants at baseline and the lack of distinction between
different types of back pain are likely to bias the findings toward null. Further
research is required to ascertain whether a population sub-group of
atherothrombotic back pain can be identified.


PMCID: PMC1756855
PMID: 10396544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Int J Epidemiol. 1999 Feb;28(1):46-52.

Socioeconomic status and cardiovascular risk factors in the Czech Republic.

Bobak M, Hertzman C, Skodova Z, Marmot M.

International Centre for Health and Society, Department of Epidemiology and
Public Health, University College London, UK.

BACKGROUND: In western countries, prevalence of cardiovascular diseases and most 
risk factors is higher in lower socioeconomic groups. The social gradients in the
former communist societies are less well known. Because in western countries
different indicators of socioeconomic status (SES) are correlated, this gradient 
is found with a number of different measures of SES. We have analysed the
presence and magnitude of the socioeconomic gradient in cardiovascular risk
factors in a former communist country. As the relationship between material
conditions and education has been much weaker than in the west, we have also
attempted to separate their effects.
METHODS: A cross-sectional survey examined a random sample of men and women
resident in six Czech districts participating in the MONICA study in 1992.
Participants completed a questionnaire, underwent anthropometric and blood
pressure measurements, and provided a blood sample. Two indicators of SES were
used: education and material conditions, the indicator constructed from car
ownership and crowding. Linear regression was employed to analyse the relation
between SES and total and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, body mass
index (BMI), waist-hip ratio (WHR) and height. Logistic regression was used to
assess the association between SES and smoking and hypertension.
RESULTS: A total of 1141 men and 1212 women (overall response rate 75%)
participated in the study. After controlling for age, all risk factors were
associated with education, except HDL cholesterol in women and BMI in men; only
smoking in both sexes and WHR in women and height in men were significantly
related to material conditions. In mutually adjusted analyses, educational
gradients persisted but associations with material conditions disappeared or
became substantially weaker. The magnitude of the educational differences was
similar to those found in western countries.
CONCLUSIONS: Socioeconomic differences in cardiovascular risk factors in Czech
Republic in 1992 had the same direction and similar magnitude as in Western
Europe, and were strongly related to education rather than material conditions.
Materialist explanations for the social differences seem unlikely in this
population.


PMID: 10195663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Lipid Res. 1999 Feb;40(2):287-94.

Effect of variation in the apo A-IV gene on body mass index and fasting and
postprandial lipids in the European Atherosclerosis Research Study II. EARS
Group.

Fisher RM, Burke H, Nicaud V, Ehnholm C, Humphries SE.

Centre for Genetics of Cardiovascular Disorders, University College London
Department of Medicine, Rayne Institute, London WC1E 6JJ, UK.

The aims of the study were to investigate associations of the apolipoprotein
(apo) A-IV polymorphisms Thr347Ser and Gln360His with anthropomorphic
measurements and fasting and postprandial lipids in subjects participating in the
European Atherosclerosis Research Study II (EARS II). The allelic frequencies of 
Ser347 and His360 were 0.185 and 0.067, respectively, in the sample as a whole.
There were no significant differences in rare allele frequency between cases
(offspring of fathers who suffered a myocardial infarction before the age of 55
years) and controls. Control subjects who were carriers of Ser347 had
significantly higher body mass indices (BMIs), waist:hip ratios, total and low
density lipoprotein cholesterol and triacylglycerol (TG) concentrations (all P < 
or = 0.02) than control subjects who were non-carriers, but these effects were
not seen in the cases. Control subjects who were carriers of His360 had lower
BMIs (P = 0.04), cholesterol and TG concentrations (both P < or = 0.07) compared 
to non-carriers, but these effects were not seen in the cases. After consumption 
of an oral fat load, carriers of His360 who were most obese (subjects in the
third tertile of BMI) had significantly reduced postprandial lipemia (P < 0.03,
as assessed by area under the curve).-Fisher, R. M., H. Burke, V. Nicaud, C.
Ehnholm, and S. E. Humphries. Effect of variation in the apoA-IV gene on body
mass index and fasting and postprandial lipids in the European Atherosclerosis
Research Study II.


PMID: 9925658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1998 Aug;46(8):999-1002.

A study of force and cross-sectional area of adductor pollicis muscle in female
hip fracture patients.

Phillips SK, Woledge RC, Bruce SA, Young A, Levy D, Yeo A, Martin FC.

Institute of Human Performance, University College London, Royal National
Orthopedic Hospital, Stanmore, Middlesex, UK.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the extent of muscle weakness in older female hip
fracture patients compared with healthy older and young women; to determine the
extent to which this weakness is caused by a decline of the force produced per
unit area of muscle rather than by a decline in muscle bulk; and to investigate
the mechanism of the decline in force per unit area.
DESIGN: This was an open study of three groups of subjects, two age matched older
groups and one young group.
SETTING: University College London, Royal Free Hospital, and St. Thomas's
Hospital, London.
PARTICIPANTS: Twenty-nine older female hip fracture patients (mean age 85.6 +/-
0.9 SEM), 18 healthy older women (mean age 84.7 +/- 1.2 SEM), and 43 young women 
(mean age 28.9 +/- 1.2 SEM).
MEASUREMENTS: Adductor pollicis muscle maximum voluntary force (MVF) during
isometric and pliometric contractions and cross-sectional area (CSA), body
weight, height, and demi-span.
RESULTS: Isometric MVF was lowest in the hip fracture group. In both older
groups, isometric MVF and CSA were lower than in the young women. Only part of
this weakness in the older groups could be explained by the smaller CSAs. The
isometric force per unit area (MVF/CSA) was also lower in both older groups, the 
hip fracture patients again having the lowest values. Analysis of variance showed
a significant difference between groups. The age-related declines in pliometric
force were much less than the declines in isometric force. This resulted in an
increase in the pliometric/isometric force ratio both for the hip fracture
patients and for the healthy older women compared with that for young women.
CONCLUSION: In comparison with the results from young women, the adductor
pollicis muscles of female hip fracture patients were even weaker than those of
healthy older women when normalized for muscle size. This decline in isometric
MVF/CSA accounted for at least half of the overall weakness in the hip fracture
patients. Inasmuch as pliometric force is maintained in situations where weakness
is caused by a decline in the force produced per muscle cross-bridge, this is the
likely mechanism of the declines in isometric MVF/CSA observed in this study.


PMID: 9706890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Arthroplasty. 1998 Apr;13(3):339-43; discussion 346-7.

Metal-on-metal articulation in total hip arthroplasty: the case for improving
metal- or ceramic-on-polyethylene.

Walker PS, Blunn GW.

Centre for Biomedical Engineering, University College London, Royal National
Orthopaedic Hospital Trust, Stanmore, Middlesex, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    J Arthroplasty. 1998 Apr;13(3):343-5; discussion 345-6.

PMID: 9590646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Milbank Q. 1998;76(3):403-48, 305.

Contribution of psychosocial factors to socioeconomic differences in health.

Marmot MG, Fuhrer R, Ettner SL, Marks NF, Bumpass LL, Ryff CD.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London Medical
School, England.

The National Survey of Mid-life Developments in the United States (MIDUS) is one 
of several studies that demonstrate socioeconomic gradients in mortality during
midlife. When MIDUS findings on self-reported health, waist to hip ratio, and
psychological well-being were analyzed for their possible roles in generating
socioeconomic differences in health, they revealed clear educational gradients
for women and men (i.e., higher education predicted better health). Certain
potential mediating variables, like household income, parents' education, smoking
behavior, and social relations contributed to an explanation of the socioeconomic
gradient. In addition, two census-based measures, combined into an area poverty
index, independently predicted ill health. The results suggest that a set of both
early and current life circumstances cumulatively contribute toward explaining
why people of lower socioeconomic status have worse health and lower
psychological well-being.


PMID: 9738169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Diabetologia. 1997 Nov;40(11):1341-9.

Social inequality in coronary risk: central obesity and the metabolic syndrome.
Evidence from the Whitehall II study.

Brunner EJ, Marmot MG, Nanchahal K, Shipley MJ, Stansfeld SA, Juneja M, Alberti
KG.

International Centre for Health and Society, Department of Epidemiology and
Public Health, University College London Medical School, UK.

This report describes the social distribution of central obesity and the
metabolic syndrome at the Whitehall II study phase 3 examination, and assesses
the contribution of health related behaviours to their distribution.
Cross-sectional analyses were conducted utilising data collected in 1991-1993
from 4978 men and 2035 women aged 39-63 years who completed an oral glucose
tolerance test. There was an inverse social gradient in prevalence of the
metabolic syndrome. The odds ratio (95% confidence interval) for having the
metabolic syndrome comparing lowest with highest employment grade was: men 2.2
(1.6-2.9), women 2.8 (1.6-4.8). Odds ratios for occupying the top quintile of the
following variables, comparing lowest with highest grade, were, for waist-hip
ratio: men 2.2 (1.8-2.8), women 1.6 (1.1-2.4); post-load glucose: men 1.4
(1.1-1.8), women 1.8 (1.2-2.6); triglycerides: men 1.6 (1.2-2.0), women 2.2
(1.5-3.3); fibrinogen: men 1.7 (1.4-2.3), women 1.9 (1.2-2.8). Current smoking
status, alcohol consumption and exercise level made a small contribution (men
11%, women 9%) to the inverse association between socioeconomic status and
metabolic syndrome prevalence. In conclusion, central obesity, components of the 
metabolic syndrome and plasma fibrinogen are strongly and inversely associated
with socioeconomic status. Our findings suggest the metabolic syndrome may
contribute to the biological explanation of social inequalities in coronary risk.
Health related behaviours appear to account for little of the social patterning
of metabolic syndrome prevalence.


PMID: 9389428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1997 Jul;82(7):2172-6.

Peak and trough growth hormone concentrations have different associations with
the insulin-like growth factor axis, body composition, and metabolic parameters.

Hindmarsh PC, Fall CH, Pringle PJ, Osmond C, Brook CG.

London Centre for Paediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, University College
London, United Kingdom.

GH is secreted in a pulsatile fashion, promoting growth and anabolism. The
components of the pulsatile signal involved in these diverse effects are unclear.
We constructed (20-min sampling interval) and analyzed 24-h serum GH profiles in 
45 adult male volunteers, 59.4-69.9 yr old, body mass index (BMI) 21.9-36.5
Kg/m2, using Fourier transformation and a concentration distribution analysis
that determines the concentration at or below which the serum GH concentrations
in the 24-h profile spend a percentage of the total time. The observed
concentrations (OC) below which 95% and 5% of the values in the time series lie
[lsb]OC95 (peaks) and OC5 (troughs)] and mean 24-h serum GH concentrations were
related to measures of the insulin-like growth factor (IGF) family, parameters of
body composition, fasting insulin and cholesterol measures, and GH-binding
protein concentrations. Mean 24-h serum GH concentrations ranged between 0.19 and
2.15 mU/L (1 microgram/L = 2.6 mU/L). Pulse periodicity was between 180 and 200
min. There was a positive relationship between peak GH levels and serum IGF-1 and
IGFBP-3 levels (r = 0.39; P = 0.009 and r = 0.32; P = 0.03, respectively). GH
trough levels were unrelated to these measures of the IGF family. In contrast, GH
troughs were related inversely to BMI (r = -0.31; P = 0.04) and waist-hip ratio
(r = -0.4; P = 0.006). Peak GH levels were not related to these measures. Factors
known to influence these measures, fasting insulin concentration, or cortisol
secretion did not alter the trough GH relationship in multiple regression
analysis. All GH parameters were related inversely to fasting insulin
concentration. Although GH parameters were related inversely to cholesterol and
low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol, this effect disappeared when age and fasting
insulin levels were introduced into the regression. GH-binding protein levels
related most strongly to BMI (r = 0.60; P < 0.001), with no effect of any GH
parameter observed in multiple regression analysis. These results suggest that
the peak values of a GH concentration profile may influence the IGF axis, whereas
trough values may influence body composition and metabolic parameters of GH
action.


PMID: 9215290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Biomed Mater Res. 1997 Jan;34(1):47-55.

Investigation into the release of bioactive recombinant human growth hormone from
normal and low-viscosity poly(methylmethacrylate) bone cements.

Goodwin CJ, Braden M, Downes S, Marshall NJ.

Department of Molecular Pathology, University College London, United Kingdom.

Previous studies showed that recombinant human growth hormone (hGH) released from
hormone-loaded poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) cement stimulated osteoid
formation in a rabbit model. Local delivery of hGH from cemented hip
arthroplasties may thereby provide a means of reducing the problem of aseptic
loosening. We have investigated two different formulations of PMMA as delivery
systems for bioactive hGH. The bioactivity of the hormone release in vitro was
monitored with an eluted stain assay (ESTA). The hGH was also measured by an
immunoassay, which provides an alternative assessment of structural integrity of 
the hormone released. In addition, we adapted the ESTA bioassay to assess the in 
vitro cytotoxicity of the cements. Using unloaded cements, the undiluted eluates 
from both types of PMMA proved cytotoxic. This cytotoxicity could be diluted out,
and the procedure allowed us to measure the bioactivity of hGH in the eluates
from hormone-loaded cements independent of their cytotoxicity. The major fraction
of the bioactivity was released from both of the PMMA cements during the first 24
h, but the hormone remained detectable in eluates collected after 36 days of
elution. Comparison of the bio- and immunoactivity of the hGH released showed
that the ratio of these two activities (i.e., the B:I ratio) was constant over
this time period. However in parallel studies in which hormone-loaded discs were 
stored under dry conditions prior to elution, we found that the B:I ratio then
declined markedly. This suggests that fully hydrated conditions, such as when the
discs are bathed in assay medium, are necessary to maintain the bioactivity of
the hGH. Both cements released only approximately 1% of the hormone originally
incorporated, but the hGH concentration which accumulated in the eluates were
high in physiologic terms (approximately 1000 mU/L).


PMID: 8978652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Arthroplasty. 1996 Apr;11(3):312-21.

Accuracy of using radiographs for custom hip stem design.

Iguchi H, Hua J, Walker PS.

Department of Biomedical Engineering, University College London, Stanmore, United
Kingdom.

If the shape of the femoral canal could be predicted with sufficient accuracy for
the design of custom femoral stems, this would reduce the cost and provide a
simpler design method than using computed tomography scans. Five groups of femurs
were used for the study. The first two groups were used to determine an average
femur shape, described by 25 transverse sections. In the next group of femurs,
the shape was predicted from radiographs by distorting the shape of the average
femur to conform to the radiographic outlines. The profiles were accurate to
within 1 mm on average, the larger errors being in the trochanteric regions. In
the proximomedial region, and in the distal canal, the accuracy was better than
0.3 +/- 0.8 mm. When femoral stems were designed from the actual and predicted
canals, there was minimal difference in the sections of the two stems. The stems 
had a particular geometric form with a straight distal end, and flares at the
proximomedial and proximoanterior locations; however, when stems designed by
either method were inserted into canals prepared by distal reaming and proximal
rasping, there was an error in fit in certain regions of approximately 1 mm. It
was concluded that for femurs without serious abnormality of shape, a biplane
radiographic method was sufficiently accurate for the prediction of canal shape
and for the design of a standard type of custom uncemented stem.


PMID: 8713912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Diabet Med. 1996 Jan;13(1):59-64.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-1) activity is elevated in Asian and
Caucasian subjects with non-insulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes but not in those 
with impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) or non-diabetic Asians.

Nagi DK, Mohamed Ali V, Jain SK, Walji S, Yudkin JS.

Department of Medicine, University College London Medical School, UK.

In order to study the plasminogen activator inhibitor activity (PAI-1) in
subjects at different risk of non-insulin-dependent diabetes and ischaemic heart 
disease we examined 89 subjects with diet controlled NIDDM (49 Caucasian, 40
Asian), 29 with impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) (13 Caucasian, 16 Asian), and
149 with normal glucose tolerance (67 Caucasian, 82 Asian). Diabetes was
diagnosed by WHO criteria and highly specific, monoclonal antibody-based assays
were used to measure insulin, intact proinsulin, and des 31,32 proinsulin.
Subjects with NIDDM were significantly more obese, had more central distribution 
of obesity, higher fasting plasma specific insulin concentrations (NIDDM median
74 pmol l-1 vs IGT 41 pmol l-1, p < 0.01 and vs normals 34 pmol l-1, p < 0.001)
and higher PAI-1 activity than normals and those with IGT (NIDDM 23.0 +/- 6.9 vs 
IGT 16.8 +/- 5.0, p < 0.001 and vs normals 17.1 +/- 6.9 AU ml-1, p < 0.001).
However, PAI-1 activity was not significantly different between Asian and
Caucasian normals (17.5 +/- 7.3 vs 16.5 +/- 6.4 AU ml-1, p = ns) and diabetic
(22.8 +/- 7.3 vs 23.1 +/- 6.6 AU ml-1, p = ns) subjects. In addition to
relationships with obesity and plasma triglyceride, PAI-1 activity, after
controlling for age, sex, body mass index, and waist-hip ratio, was related to
fasting insulin (partial r = 0.22, p < 0.001), intact proinsulin (partial r =
0.36, p < 0.001), and des 31,32 proinsulin concentrations (partial r = 0.33, p < 
0.001) as measured by highly specific assays. The association of PAI-1 with
diabetes was weakened but remained statistically significant (p = 0.042) after
controlling for age, sex, ethnicity, obesity, plasma triglyceride, and all
insulin-like molecules. We conclude that, although PAI-1 activity is raised in
subjects with diet-treated NIDDM, it is normal in subjects with IGT and
non-diabetic Asians, populations at high risk of NIDDM and ischaemic heart
disease. Raised PAI-1 activity may play an important role in the pathogenesis of 
macrovascular disease in subjects with NIDDM, but is unlikely to explain excess
risk of ischaemic heart disease in Asians and those with impaired glucose
tolerance.


PMID: 8741814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 1995 Sep;15(9):1330-7.

Longitudinal study of associations of microalbuminuria with the insulin
resistance syndrome and sodium-lithium countertransport in nondiabetic subjects.

Foyle WJ, Carstensen E, Fernández MC, Yudkin JS.

Department of Medicine, University College London Medical School, England.

Microalbuminuria in diabetic patients is associated with ischemic heart disease
and insulin resistance. We previously found a 9% prevalence of microalbuminuria
in a nondiabetic population that we have reassessed, investigating associations
of microalbuminuria with hypertension, dyslipidemia, hyperinsulinemia, and
sodium-lithium countertransport. Of 125 subjects reexamined, 42 had been
microalbuminuric 3 years previously. Twelve of these (29%) were microalbuminuric 
on at least one sample at follow-up, and 30 (76%) were normoalbuminuric on two.
Of the 79 previously normoalbuminuric subjects, 12 (15%) became microalbuminuric 
on one sample, while 67 (85%) remained normoalbuminuric. Subjects who were
microalbuminuric at both screening and recall were older (mean +/- SD, 65.9 +/-
11 versus 59.1 +/- 10.2 years, P = .04), with a higher waist-to-hip ratio (0.93
+/- 0.09 versus 0.86 +/- 0.08, P = .008) and at recall, on univariate analysis,
had higher specific insulin (44.2 [range, 16.9 to 157.0] versus 28.4 [7.4 to
129.0] pmol/L, P = .005), intact proinsulin (5.1 [1.5 to 11.0] versus 3.0 [0.8 to
14.6] pmol/L, P = .003), and des-31,32-proinsulin (5.0 [0.5 to 9.8] versus 1.0
[0.5 to 12.2] pmol/L, P = .004) concentrations. There was also a significant
difference in des-31,32-proinsulin concentration, after adjustment for covariates
(P = .013), between subjects classified either as microalbuminuric or as
normoalbuminuric at screening. There was no difference in body mass index;
fasting blood glucose; systolic or diastolic blood pressure; total, HDL, or LDL
cholesterol; triglycerides; plasminogen activator inhibitor-1; or sodium-lithium 
countertransport activity between consistently normoalbuminuric and persistently 
microalbuminuric subjects.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 7670946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Br J Gen Pract. 1995 Mar;45(392):127-31.

From the surgery to the surgeon: does deprivation influence consultation and
operation rates?

Chaturvedi N, Ben-Shlomo Y.

Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London Medical
School.

BACKGROUND: Concern about equity of access to health care has increased since the
health care reforms implemented in the 1990s. Access to specialist health care is
controlled by general practitioners; assessing and ensuring equity should
therefore begin in general practice.
AIM: This study set out to determine whether there are socioeconomic differences 
in the relationship between expressed need for possible surgical intervention
(consulting a general practitioner) and surgical provision.
METHOD: Information on the social class distribution of expressed need was
obtained from the third national morbidity survey (1981-82) for 140,049 patients 
consulting a general practitioner. The conditions examined were: inguinal hernia,
gallstones, tonsillitis, varicose veins, cataract and osteoarthritis. This
expressed need was compared with the appropriate operation for all residents of
North East Thames Regional Health Authority from January 1991 to July 1992
classified, according to area of residence, by the Townsend deprivation score.
RESULTS: The relationship between expressed need and provision by deprivation was
concordant for some conditions, but discordant for others. For cataract and
tonsillitis, there was an inverse U pattern between increasing deprivation and
both patient consultation and operation ratios. For varicose veins, deprivation
was associated with higher patient consultation and operation ratios. For hernia,
gallstones and osteoarthritis, consultations increased with deprivation, but
operation ratios were either unrelated to deprivation scores (hernia and
gallstones) or decreased by deprivation score (hip operations).
CONCLUSION: There are marked socioeconomic differences in consultation ratios for
these common conditions which may not be matched by operation ratios. For
discordant comparisons, people in the most deprived quartiles were generally
least likely to receive surgery despite being most likely to consult a general
practitioner with symptoms. If validated, these findings have important
implications for general practice and service providers.


PMCID: PMC1239172
PMID: 7772389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1994 Jan;76(1):95-103.

Relative motion of hip stems under load. An in vitro study of symmetrical,
asymmetrical, and custom asymmetrical designs.

Hua J, Walker PS.

University College London, Stanmore, Middlesex, United Kingdom.

Symmetrical, asymmetrical, and custom asymmetrical stems without collars were
manufactured and inserted without cement, in that order, into each of eight
femora. Displacement transducers were mounted at different locations to measure
relative motion between the stem and the bone. A load was applied to simulate the
forces acting on a hip joint in a single-limb stance. A force of 1000 newtons was
applied three times in order to seat the prosthesis, and then a cyclical force of
1000 newtons was applied to the head of the prosthesis; readings of relative
motion were taken every 500 cycles, until 2500 cycles had been reached. The
relative motion diminished as the number of cycles increased, with most of the
reduction occurring within the first 500 cycles. The symmetrical stem had the
least relative axial motion, with an average of six micrometers, but the other
stems also had low values: eleven micrometers for the custom stem, and nineteen
micrometers for the asymmetrical stem. In terms of axial rotation, however, the
symmetrical stem had several times more motion than did the other two stems.
Motion of the stem tip toward or away from the canal in the frontal plane and in 
the sagittal plane also was higher for the symmetrical stem. Axial migration
(permanent sinkage after 2500 cycles) was very similar between all three types of
stem. In a torsional loading test, the symmetrical stem showed about ten times
more relative rotational motion than did the other two stems. Over-all, the
custom stem and the asymmetrical stem had similar results.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 
250 WORDS)


PMID: 8288670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Med Genet. 1991 Jan;28(1):41-3.

The sex ratios of probands and of secondary cases in conditions of multifactorial
inheritance where liability varies with sex.

James WH.

MRC Mammalian Development Unit, University College London.

Some pathological conditions affect one sex more often than the other. A curious 
feature of some of these conditions (dyslexia, congenital dislocation of the hip,
pyloric stenosis, otosclerosis, lupus erythematosus, ankylosing spondylitis) is
that the sex ratio (proportion of males) of randomly ascertained probands is more
extreme than that of their affected relatives. In all these conditions,
multifactorial inheritance has been suspected. A simple model is offered here of 
multifactorial inheritance with liability varying by sex. Under the model, such a
disparity between sex ratios would be expected.


PMCID: PMC1016746
PMID: 1999831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

